<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
<h3>SCENE I. GLOUCESTER’s castle.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter EDMUND, and CURAN meets him</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.1>Save thee, Curan.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>CURAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.2>And you, sir. I have been with your father, and</a><br>
<a name=2.1.3>given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan</a><br>
<a name=2.1.4>his duchess will be here with him this night.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.5>How comes that?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>CURAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.6>Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.7>I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but</a><br>
<a name=2.1.8>ear-kissing arguments?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.9>Not I	pray you, what are they?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>CURAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.10>Have you heard of no likely wars toward, ’twixt the</a><br>
<a name=2.1.11>Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.12>Not a word.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>CURAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.13>You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.14>The duke be here to-night? The better! best!</a><br>
<a name=2.1.15>This weaves itself perforce into my business.</a><br>
<a name=2.1.16>My father hath set guard to take my brother;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.17>And I have one thing, of a queasy question,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.18>Which I must act: briefness and fortune, work!</a><br>
<a name=2.1.19>Brother, a word; descend: brother, I say!</a><br>
<p><i>Enter EDGAR</i></p>
<a name=2.1.20>My father watches: O sir, fly this place;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.21>Intelligence is given where you are hid;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.22>You have now the good advantage of the night:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.23>Have you not spoken ’gainst the Duke of Cornwall?</a><br>
<a name=2.1.24>He’s coming hither: now, i’ the night, i’ the haste,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.25>And Regan with him: have you nothing said</a><br>
<a name=2.1.26>Upon his party ’gainst the Duke of Albany?</a><br>
<a name=2.1.27>Advise yourself.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.28> I am sure on’t, not a word.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.29>I hear my father coming: pardon me:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.30>In cunning I must draw my sword upon you</a><br>
<a name=2.1.31>Draw; seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.</a><br>
<a name=2.1.32>Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here!</a><br>
<a name=2.1.33>Fly, brother. Torches, torches! So, farewell.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit EDGAR</i></p>
<a name=2.1.34>Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion.</a><br>
<p><i>Wounds his arm</i></p>
<a name=2.1.35>Of my more fierce endeavour: I have seen drunkards</a><br>
<a name=2.1.36>Do more than this in sport. Father, father!</a><br>
<a name=2.1.37>Stop, stop! No help?</a><br>
<p><i>Enter GLOUCESTER, and Servants with torches</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.38>Now, Edmund, where’s the villain?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.39>Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.40>Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon</a><br>
<a name=2.1.41>To stand auspicious mistress⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.42>But where is he?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.43>Look, sir, I bleed.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.44>Where is the villain, Edmund?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.45>Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.46>Pursue him, ho! Go after.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt some Servants</i></p>
<a name=2.1.47>By no means what?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.48>Persuade me to the murder of your lordship;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.49>But that I told him, the revenging gods</a><br>
<a name=2.1.50>’Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.51>Spoke, with how manifold and strong a bond</a><br>
<a name=2.1.52>The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.53>Seeing how loathly opposite I stood</a><br>
<a name=2.1.54>To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.55>With his prepared sword, he charges home</a><br>
<a name=2.1.56>My unprovided body, lanced mine arm:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.57>But when he saw my best alarum’d spirits,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.58>Bold in the quarrel’s right, roused to the encounter,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.59>Or whether gasted by the noise I made,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.60>Full suddenly he fled.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.61>Let him fly far:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.62>Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.63>And found⁠—dispatch. The noble duke my master,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.64>My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.65>By his authority I will proclaim it,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.66>That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.67>Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.68>He that conceals him, death.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.69>When I dissuaded him from his intent,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.70>And found him pight to do it, with curst speech</a><br>
<a name=2.1.71>I threaten’d to discover him: he replied,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.72>‘Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.73>If I would stand against thee, would the reposal</a><br>
<a name=2.1.74>Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee</a><br>
<a name=2.1.75>Make thy words faith’d? No: what I should deny⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.1.76>As this I would: ay, though thou didst produce</a><br>
<a name=2.1.77>My very character⁠—I’ld turn it all</a><br>
<a name=2.1.78>To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practise:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.79>And thou must make a dullard of the world,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.80>If they not thought the profits of my death</a><br>
<a name=2.1.81>Were very pregnant and potential spurs</a><br>
<a name=2.1.82>To make thee seek it.’</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.83>Strong and fasten’d villain</a><br>
<a name=2.1.84>Would he deny his letter? I never got him.</a><br>
<p><i>Tucket within</i></p>
<a name=2.1.85>Hark, the duke’s trumpets! I know not why he comes.</a><br>
<a name=2.1.86>All ports I’ll bar; the villain shall not ‘scape;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.87>The duke must grant me that: besides, his picture</a><br>
<a name=2.1.88>I will send far and near, that all the kingdom</a><br>
<a name=2.1.89>May have the due note of him; and of my land,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.90>Loyal and natural boy, I’ll work the means</a><br>
<a name=2.1.91>To make thee capable.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, and Attendants</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.92>How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.93>Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.94>If it be true, all vengeance comes too short</a><br>
<a name=2.1.95>Which can pursue the offender. How dost, my lord?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.96>O, madam, my old heart is crack’d, it’s crack’d!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.97>What, did my father’s godson seek your life?</a><br>
<a name=2.1.98>He whom my father named? your Edgar?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.99>O, lady, lady, shame would have it hid!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.100>Was he not companion with the riotous knights</a><br>
<a name=2.1.101>That tend upon my father?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.102>I know not, madam: ’tis too bad, too bad.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.103>Yes, madam, he was of that consort.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech31><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.104>No marvel, then, though he were ill affected:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.105>’Tis they have put him on the old man’s death,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.106>To have the expense and waste of his revenues.</a><br>
<a name=2.1.107>I have this present evening from my sister</a><br>
<a name=2.1.108>Been well inform’d of them; and with such cautions,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.109>That if they come to sojourn at my house,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.110>I’ll not be there.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech32><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.111>Nor I, assure thee, Regan.</a><br>
<a name=2.1.112>Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father</a><br>
<a name=2.1.113>A child-like office.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech33><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.114>’Twas my duty, sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech34><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.115>He did bewray his practise; and received</a><br>
<a name=2.1.116>This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech35><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.117>Is he pursued?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech36><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.118> Ay, my good lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech37><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.119>If he be taken, he shall never more</a><br>
<a name=2.1.120>Be fear’d of doing harm: make your own purpose,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.121>How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.122>Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant</a><br>
<a name=2.1.123>So much commend itself, you shall be ours:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.124>Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;</a><br>
<a name=2.1.125>You we first seize on.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech38><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.126>I shall serve you, sir,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.127>Truly, however else.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech39><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.128>For him I thank your grace.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech40><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.129>You know not why we came to visit you⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech41><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.130>Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.131>Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.132>Wherein we must have use of your advice:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.133>Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.134>Of differences, which I least thought it fit</a><br>
<a name=2.1.135>To answer from our home; the several messengers</a><br>
<a name=2.1.136>From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.137>Lay comforts to your bosom; and bestow</a><br>
<a name=2.1.138>Your needful counsel to our business,</a><br>
<a name=2.1.139>Which craves the instant use.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech42><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.1.140>I serve you, madam:</a><br>
<a name=2.1.141>Your graces are right welcome.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. Before Gloucester’s castle.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter KENT and OSWALD, severally</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.1>Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.2>Ay.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.3>Where may we set our horses?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.4>I’ the mire.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.5>Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.6>I love thee not.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.7>Why, then, I care not for thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.8>If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee</a><br>
<a name=2.2.9>care for me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.10>Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.11>Fellow, I know thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.12>What dost thou know me for?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.13>A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a</a><br>
<a name=2.2.14>base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.15>hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a</a><br>
<a name=2.2.16>lily-livered, action-taking knave, a whoreson,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.17>glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue;</a><br>
<a name=2.2.18>one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a</a><br>
<a name=2.2.19>bawd, in way of good service, and art nothing but</a><br>
<a name=2.2.20>the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pandar,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.21>and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch: one whom I</a><br>
<a name=2.2.22>will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deniest</a><br>
<a name=2.2.23>the least syllable of thy addition.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.24>Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail</a><br>
<a name=2.2.25>on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.26>What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou</a><br>
<a name=2.2.27>knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up</a><br>
<a name=2.2.28>thy heels, and beat thee before the king? Draw, you</a><br>
<a name=2.2.29>rogue: for, though it be night, yet the moon</a><br>
<a name=2.2.30>shines; I’ll make a sop o’ the moonshine of you:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.31>draw, you whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw.</a><br>
<p><i>Drawing his sword</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.32>Away! I have nothing to do with thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.33>Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against the</a><br>
<a name=2.2.34>king; and take vanity the puppet’s part against the</a><br>
<a name=2.2.35>royalty of her father: draw, you rogue, or I’ll so</a><br>
<a name=2.2.36>carbonado your shanks: draw, you rascal; come your ways.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.37>Help, ho! murder! help!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.38>Strike, you slave; stand, rogue, stand; you neat</a><br>
<a name=2.2.39>slave, strike.</a><br>
<p><i>Beating him</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.40>Help, ho! murder! murder!</a><br>
<p><i>Enter EDMUND, with his rapier drawn, CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.41>How now! What’s the matter?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.42>With you, goodman boy, an you please: come, I’ll</a><br>
<a name=2.2.43>flesh ye; come on, young master.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.44>Weapons! arms! What ‘s the matter here?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.45>Keep peace, upon your lives:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.46>He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.47>The messengers from our sister and the king.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.48>What is your difference? speak.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.49>I am scarce in breath, my lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.50>No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour. You</a><br>
<a name=2.2.51>cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee: a</a><br>
<a name=2.2.52>tailor made thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.53>Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.54>Ay, a tailor, sir: a stone-cutter or painter could</a><br>
<a name=2.2.55>not have made him so ill, though he had been but two</a><br>
<a name=2.2.56>hours at the trade.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.57>Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech31><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.58>This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared</a><br>
<a name=2.2.59>at suit of his gray beard⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech32><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.60>Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My</a><br>
<a name=2.2.61>lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this</a><br>
<a name=2.2.62>unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the wall of</a><br>
<a name=2.2.63>a jakes with him. Spare my gray beard, you wagtail?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech33><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.64>Peace, sirrah!</a><br>
<a name=2.2.65>You beastly knave, know you no reverence?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech34><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.66>Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech35><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.67>Why art thou angry?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech36><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.68>That such a slave as this should wear a sword,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.69>Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.70>Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain</a><br>
<a name=2.2.71>Which are too intrinse t’ unloose; smooth every passion</a><br>
<a name=2.2.72>That in the natures of their lords rebel;</a><br>
<a name=2.2.73>Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;</a><br>
<a name=2.2.74>Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks</a><br>
<a name=2.2.75>With every gale and vary of their masters,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.76>Knowing nought, like dogs, but following.</a><br>
<a name=2.2.77>A plague upon your epileptic visage!</a><br>
<a name=2.2.78>Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?</a><br>
<a name=2.2.79>Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.80>I’ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech37><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.81>Why, art thou mad, old fellow?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech38><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.82>How fell you out? say that.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech39><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.83>No contraries hold more antipathy</a><br>
<a name=2.2.84>Than I and such a knave.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech40><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.85>Why dost thou call him a knave? What’s his offence?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech41><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.86>His countenance likes me not.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech42><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.87>No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech43><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.88>Sir, ’tis my occupation to be plain:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.89>I have seen better faces in my time</a><br>
<a name=2.2.90>Than stands on any shoulder that I see</a><br>
<a name=2.2.91>Before me at this instant.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech44><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.92>This is some fellow,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.93>Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect</a><br>
<a name=2.2.94>A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb</a><br>
<a name=2.2.95>Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.96>An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!</a><br>
<a name=2.2.97>An they will take it, so; if not, he’s plain.</a><br>
<a name=2.2.98>These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness</a><br>
<a name=2.2.99>Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends</a><br>
<a name=2.2.100>Than twenty silly ducking observants</a><br>
<a name=2.2.101>That stretch their duties nicely.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech45><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.102>Sir, in good sooth, in sincere verity,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.103>Under the allowance of your great aspect,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.104>Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire</a><br>
<a name=2.2.105>On flickering Phoebus’ front⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech46><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.106>What mean’st by this?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech47><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.107>To go out of my dialect, which you</a><br>
<a name=2.2.108>discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no</a><br>
<a name=2.2.109>flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain</a><br>
<a name=2.2.110>accent was a plain knave; which for my part</a><br>
<a name=2.2.111>I will not be, though I should win your displeasure</a><br>
<a name=2.2.112>to entreat me to ‘t.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech48><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.113>What was the offence you gave him?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech49><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.114>I never gave him any:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.115>It pleased the king his master very late</a><br>
<a name=2.2.116>To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;</a><br>
<a name=2.2.117>When he, conjunct and flattering his displeasure,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.118>Tripp’d me behind; being down, insulted, rail’d,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.119>And put upon him such a deal of man,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.120>That worthied him, got praises of the king</a><br>
<a name=2.2.121>For him attempting who was self-subdued;</a><br>
<a name=2.2.122>And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.123>Drew on me here again.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech50><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.124>None of these rogues and cowards</a><br>
<a name=2.2.125>But Ajax is their fool.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech51><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.126>Fetch forth the stocks!</a><br>
<a name=2.2.127>You stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.128>We’ll teach you⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech52><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.129> Sir, I am too old to learn:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.130>Call not your stocks for me: I serve the king;</a><br>
<a name=2.2.131>On whose employment I was sent to you:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.132>You shall do small respect, show too bold malice</a><br>
<a name=2.2.133>Against the grace and person of my master,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.134>Stocking his messenger.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech53><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.135>Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.136>There shall he sit till noon.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech54><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.137>Till noon! till night, my lord; and all night too.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech55><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.138>Why, madam, if I were your father’s dog,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.139>You should not use me so.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech56><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.140>Sir, being his knave, I will.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech57><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.141>This is a fellow of the self-same colour</a><br>
<a name=2.2.142>Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!</a><br>
<p><i>Stocks brought out</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech58><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.143>Let me beseech your grace not to do so:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.144>His fault is much, and the good king his master</a><br>
<a name=2.2.145>Will cheque him for ‘t: your purposed low correction</a><br>
<a name=2.2.146>Is such as basest and contemned’st wretches</a><br>
<a name=2.2.147>For pilferings and most common trespasses</a><br>
<a name=2.2.148>Are punish’d with: the king must take it ill,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.149>That he’s so slightly valued in his messenger,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.150>Should have him thus restrain’d.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech59><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.151>I’ll answer that.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech60><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.152>My sister may receive it much more worse,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.153>To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.154>For following her affairs. Put in his legs.</a><br>
<p><i>KENT is put in the stocks</i></p>
<a name=2.2.155>Come, my good lord, away.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER and KENT</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech61><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.156>I am sorry for thee, friend; ’tis the duke’s pleasure,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.157>Whose disposition, all the world well knows,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.158>Will not be rubb’d nor stopp’d: I’ll entreat for thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech62><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.159>Pray, do not, sir: I have watched and travell’d hard;</a><br>
<a name=2.2.160>Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I’ll whistle.</a><br>
<a name=2.2.161>A good man’s fortune may grow out at heels:</a><br>
<a name=2.2.162>Give you good morrow!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech63><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.163>The duke’s to blame in this; ’twill be ill taken.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech64><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.2.164>Good king, that must approve the common saw,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.165>Thou out of heaven’s benediction comest</a><br>
<a name=2.2.166>To the warm sun!</a><br>
<a name=2.2.167>Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.168>That by thy comfortable beams I may</a><br>
<a name=2.2.169>Peruse this letter! Nothing almost sees miracles</a><br>
<a name=2.2.170>But misery: I know ’tis from Cordelia,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.171>Who hath most fortunately been inform’d</a><br>
<a name=2.2.172>Of my obscured course; and shall find time</a><br>
<a name=2.2.173>From this enormous state, seeking to give</a><br>
<a name=2.2.174>Losses their remedies. All weary and o’erwatch’d,</a><br>
<a name=2.2.175>Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold</a><br>
<a name=2.2.176>This shameful lodging.</a><br>
<a name=2.2.177>Fortune, good night: smile once more: turn thy wheel!</a><br>
<p><i>Sleeps</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. A wood.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter EDGAR</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.3.1>I heard myself proclaim’d;</a><br>
<a name=2.3.2>And by the happy hollow of a tree</a><br>
<a name=2.3.3>Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.4>That guard, and most unusual vigilance,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.5>Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may ‘scape,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.6>I will preserve myself: and am bethought</a><br>
<a name=2.3.7>To take the basest and most poorest shape</a><br>
<a name=2.3.8>That ever penury, in contempt of man,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.9>Brought near to beast: my face I’ll grime with filth;</a><br>
<a name=2.3.10>Blanket my loins: elf all my hair in knots;</a><br>
<a name=2.3.11>And with presented nakedness out-face</a><br>
<a name=2.3.12>The winds and persecutions of the sky.</a><br>
<a name=2.3.13>The country gives me proof and precedent</a><br>
<a name=2.3.14>Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.15>Strike in their numb’d and mortified bare arms</a><br>
<a name=2.3.16>Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;</a><br>
<a name=2.3.17>And with this horrible object, from low farms,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.18>Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.19>Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,</a><br>
<a name=2.3.20>Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!</a><br>
<a name=2.3.21>That’s something yet: Edgar I nothing am.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE IV. Before GLOUCESTER’s castle. KENT in the stocks.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter KING LEAR, Fool, and Gentleman</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.1>’Tis strange that they should so depart from home,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.2>And not send back my messenger.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.3>As I learn’d,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.4>The night before there was no purpose in them</a><br>
<a name=2.4.5>Of this remove.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.6> Hail to thee, noble master!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.7>Ha!</a><br>
<a name=2.4.8>Makest thou this shame thy pastime?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.9>No, my lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>Fool</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.10>Ha, ha! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied</a><br>
<a name=2.4.11>by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by</a><br>
<a name=2.4.12>the loins, and men by the legs: when a man’s</a><br>
<a name=2.4.13>over-lusty at legs, then he wears wooden</a><br>
<a name=2.4.14>nether-stocks.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.15>What’s he that hath so much thy place mistook</a><br>
<a name=2.4.16>To set thee here?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.17> It is both he and she;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.18>Your son and daughter.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.19>No.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.20>Yes.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.21>No, I say.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.22>I say, yea.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.23>No, no, they would not.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.24>Yes, they have.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.25>By Jupiter, I swear, no.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.26>By Juno, I swear, ay.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.27>They durst not do ‘t;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.28>They could not, would not do ‘t; ’tis worse than murder,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.29>To do upon respect such violent outrage:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.30>Resolve me, with all modest haste, which way</a><br>
<a name=2.4.31>Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.32>Coming from us.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.33> My lord, when at their home</a><br>
<a name=2.4.34>I did commend your highness’ letters to them,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.35>Ere I was risen from the place that show’d</a><br>
<a name=2.4.36>My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.37>Stew’d in his haste, half breathless, panting forth</a><br>
<a name=2.4.38>From Goneril his mistress salutations;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.39>Deliver’d letters, spite of intermission,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.40>Which presently they read: on whose contents,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.41>They summon’d up their meiny, straight took horse;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.42>Commanded me to follow, and attend</a><br>
<a name=2.4.43>The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.44>And meeting here the other messenger,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.45>Whose welcome, I perceived, had poison’d mine⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.46>Being the very fellow that of late</a><br>
<a name=2.4.47>Display’d so saucily against your highness⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.48>Having more man than wit about me, drew:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.49>He raised the house with loud and coward cries.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.50>Your son and daughter found this trespass worth</a><br>
<a name=2.4.51>The shame which here it suffers.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>Fool</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.52>Winter’s not gone yet, if the wild-geese fly that way.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.53>Fathers that wear rags</a><br>
<a name=2.4.54>Do make their children blind;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.55>But fathers that bear bags</a><br>
<a name=2.4.56>Shall see their children kind.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.57>Fortune, that arrant whore,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.58>Ne’er turns the key to the poor.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.59>But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours</a><br>
<a name=2.4.60>for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.61>O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!</a><br>
<a name=2.4.62>Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.63>Thy element’s below! Where is this daughter?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.64>With the earl, sir, here within.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.65>Follow me not;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.66>Stay here.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.67>Made you no more offence but what you speak of?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.68>None.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.69>How chance the king comes with so small a train?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>Fool</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.70>And thou hadst been set i’ the stocks for that</a><br>
<a name=2.4.71>question, thou hadst well deserved it.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.72>Why, fool?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>Fool</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.73>We’ll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee</a><br>
<a name=2.4.74>there’s no labouring i’ the winter. All that follow</a><br>
<a name=2.4.75>their noses are led by their eyes but blind men; and</a><br>
<a name=2.4.76>there’s not a nose among twenty but can smell him</a><br>
<a name=2.4.77>that’s stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel</a><br>
<a name=2.4.78>runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with</a><br>
<a name=2.4.79>following it: but the great one that goes up the</a><br>
<a name=2.4.80>hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man</a><br>
<a name=2.4.81>gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I</a><br>
<a name=2.4.82>would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.83>That sir which serves and seeks for gain,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.84>And follows but for form,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.85>Will pack when it begins to rain,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.86>And leave thee in the storm,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.87>But I will tarry; the fool will stay,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.88>And let the wise man fly:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.89>The knave turns fool that runs away;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.90>The fool no knave, perdy.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.91>Where learned you this, fool?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>Fool</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.92>Not i’ the stocks, fool.</a><br>
<p><i>Re-enter KING LEAR with GLOUCESTER</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.93>Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.94>They have travell’d all the night? Mere fetches;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.95>The images of revolt and flying off.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.96>Fetch me a better answer.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech31><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.97>My dear lord,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.98>You know the fiery quality of the duke;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.99>How unremoveable and fix’d he is</a><br>
<a name=2.4.100>In his own course.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech32><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.101>Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!</a><br>
<a name=2.4.102>Fiery? what quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.103>I’ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech33><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.104>Well, my good lord, I have inform’d them so.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech34><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.105>Inform’d them! Dost thou understand me, man?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech35><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.106>Ay, my good lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech36><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.107>The king would speak with Cornwall; the dear father</a><br>
<a name=2.4.108>Would with his daughter speak, commands her service:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.109>Are they inform’d of this? My breath and blood!</a><br>
<a name=2.4.110>Fiery? the fiery duke? Tell the hot duke that⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.111>No, but not yet: may be he is not well:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.112>Infirmity doth still neglect all office</a><br>
<a name=2.4.113>Whereto our health is bound; we are not ourselves</a><br>
<a name=2.4.114>When nature, being oppress’d, commands the mind</a><br>
<a name=2.4.115>To suffer with the body: I’ll forbear;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.116>And am fall’n out with my more headier will,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.117>To take the indisposed and sickly fit</a><br>
<a name=2.4.118>For the sound man. Death on my state! wherefore</a><br>
<p><i>Looking on KENT</i></p>
<a name=2.4.119>Should he sit here? This act persuades me</a><br>
<a name=2.4.120>That this remotion of the duke and her</a><br>
<a name=2.4.121>Is practise only. Give me my servant forth.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.122>Go tell the duke and ‘s wife I’ld speak with them,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.123>Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.124>Or at their chamber-door I’ll beat the drum</a><br>
<a name=2.4.125>Till it cry sleep to death.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech37><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.126>I would have all well betwixt you.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech38><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.127>O me, my heart, my rising heart! but, down!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech39><b>Fool</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.128>Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels</a><br>
<a name=2.4.129>when she put ’em i’ the paste alive; she knapped ’em</a><br>
<a name=2.4.130>o’ the coxcombs with a stick, and cried ‘Down,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.131>wantons, down!’ ’Twas her brother that, in pure</a><br>
<a name=2.4.132>kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech40><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.133>Good morrow to you both.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech41><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.134>Hail to your grace!</a><br>
<p><i>KENT is set at liberty</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech42><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.135>I am glad to see your highness.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech43><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.136>Regan, I think you are; I know what reason</a><br>
<a name=2.4.137>I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.138>I would divorce me from thy mother’s tomb,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.139>Sepulchring an adultress.</a><br>
<p><i>To KENT</i></p>
<a name=2.4.140>O, are you free?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.141>Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.142>Thy sister’s naught: O Regan, she hath tied</a><br>
<a name=2.4.143>Sharp-tooth’d unkindness, like a vulture, here:</a><br>
<p><i>Points to his heart</i></p>
<a name=2.4.144>I can scarce speak to thee; thou’lt not believe</a><br>
<a name=2.4.145>With how depraved a quality⁠—O Regan!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech44><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.146>I pray you, sir, take patience: I have hope.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.147>You less know how to value her desert</a><br>
<a name=2.4.148>Than she to scant her duty.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech45><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.149>Say, how is that?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech46><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.150>I cannot think my sister in the least</a><br>
<a name=2.4.151>Would fail her obligation: if, sir, perchance</a><br>
<a name=2.4.152>She have restrain’d the riots of your followers,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.153>’Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.154>As clears her from all blame.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech47><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.155>My curses on her!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech48><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.156> O, sir, you are old.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.157>Nature in you stands on the very verge</a><br>
<a name=2.4.158>Of her confine: you should be ruled and led</a><br>
<a name=2.4.159>By some discretion, that discerns your state</a><br>
<a name=2.4.160>Better than you yourself. Therefore, I pray you,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.161>That to our sister you do make return;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.162>Say you have wrong’d her, sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech49><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.163>Ask her forgiveness?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.164>Do you but mark how this becomes the house:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.165>‘Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;</a><br>
<p><i>Kneeling</i></p>
<a name=2.4.166>Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg</a><br>
<a name=2.4.167>That you’ll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.’</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech50><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.168>Good sir, no more; these are unsightly tricks:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.169>Return you to my sister.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech51><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.170>[Rising] Never, Regan:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.171>She hath abated me of half my train;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.172>Look’d black upon me; struck me with her tongue,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.173>Most serpent-like, upon the very heart:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.174>All the stored vengeances of heaven fall</a><br>
<a name=2.4.175>On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.176>You taking airs, with lameness!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech52><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.177>Fie, sir, fie!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech53><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.178>You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames</a><br>
<a name=2.4.179>Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.180>You fen-suck’d fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.181>To fall and blast her pride!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech54><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.182>O the blest gods! so will you wish on me,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.183>When the rash mood is on.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech55><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.184>No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.185>Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give</a><br>
<a name=2.4.186>Thee o’er to harshness: her eyes are fierce; but thine</a><br>
<a name=2.4.187>Do comfort and not burn. ’Tis not in thee</a><br>
<a name=2.4.188>To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.189>To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.190>And in conclusion to oppose the bolt</a><br>
<a name=2.4.191>Against my coming in: thou better know’st</a><br>
<a name=2.4.192>The offices of nature, bond of childhood,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.193>Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.194>Thy half o’ the kingdom hast thou not forgot,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.195>Wherein I thee endow’d.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech56><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.196>Good sir, to the purpose.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech57><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.197>Who put my man i’ the stocks?</a><br>
<p><i>Tucket within</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech58><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.198>What trumpet’s that?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech59><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.199>I know’t, my sister’s: this approves her letter,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.200>That she would soon be here.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter OSWALD</i></p>
<a name=2.4.201>Is your lady come?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech60><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.202>This is a slave, whose easy-borrow’d pride</a><br>
<a name=2.4.203>Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.204>Out, varlet, from my sight!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech61><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.205>What means your grace?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech62><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.206>Who stock’d my servant? Regan, I have good hope</a><br>
<a name=2.4.207>Thou didst not know on’t. Who comes here? O heavens,</a><br>
<p><i>Enter GONERIL</i></p>
<a name=2.4.208>If you do love old men, if your sweet sway</a><br>
<a name=2.4.209>Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.210>Make it your cause; send down, and take my part!</a><br>
<p><i>To GONERIL</i></p>
<a name=2.4.211>Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.212>O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech63><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.213>Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.214>All’s not offence that indiscretion finds</a><br>
<a name=2.4.215>And dotage terms so.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech64><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.216>O sides, you are too tough;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.217>Will you yet hold? How came my man i’ the stocks?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech65><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.218>I set him there, sir: but his own disorders</a><br>
<a name=2.4.219>Deserved much less advancement.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech66><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.220>You! did you?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech67><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.221>I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.222>If, till the expiration of your month,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.223>You will return and sojourn with my sister,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.224>Dismissing half your train, come then to me:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.225>I am now from home, and out of that provision</a><br>
<a name=2.4.226>Which shall be needful for your entertainment.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech68><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.227>Return to her, and fifty men dismiss’d?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.228>No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose</a><br>
<a name=2.4.229>To wage against the enmity o’ the air;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.230>To be a comrade with the wolf and owl⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.231>Necessity’s sharp pinch! Return with her?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.232>Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took</a><br>
<a name=2.4.233>Our youngest born, I could as well be brought</a><br>
<a name=2.4.234>To knee his throne, and, squire-like; pension beg</a><br>
<a name=2.4.235>To keep base life afoot. Return with her?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.236>Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter</a><br>
<a name=2.4.237>To this detested groom.</a><br>
<p><i>Pointing at OSWALD</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech69><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.238>At your choice, sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech70><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.239>I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.240>I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.241>We’ll no more meet, no more see one another:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.242>But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.243>Or rather a disease that’s in my flesh,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.244>Which I must needs call mine: thou art a boil,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.245>A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.246>In my corrupted blood. But I’ll not chide thee;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.247>Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.248>I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.249>Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.250>Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.251>I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.252>I and my hundred knights.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech71><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.253>Not altogether so:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.254>I look’d not for you yet, nor am provided</a><br>
<a name=2.4.255>For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.256>For those that mingle reason with your passion</a><br>
<a name=2.4.257>Must be content to think you old, and so⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.258>But she knows what she does.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech72><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.259>Is this well spoken?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech73><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.260>I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.261>Is it not well? What should you need of more?</a><br>
<a name=2.4.262>Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger</a><br>
<a name=2.4.263>Speak ’gainst so great a number? How, in one house,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.264>Should many people, under two commands,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.265>Hold amity? ’Tis hard; almost impossible.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech74><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.266>Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance</a><br>
<a name=2.4.267>From those that she calls servants or from mine?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech75><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.268>Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.269>We could control them. If you will come to me⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.270>For now I spy a danger⁠—I entreat you</a><br>
<a name=2.4.271>To bring but five and twenty: to no more</a><br>
<a name=2.4.272>Will I give place or notice.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech76><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.273>I gave you all⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech77><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.274> And in good time you gave it.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech78><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.275>Made you my guardians, my depositaries;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.276>But kept a reservation to be follow’d</a><br>
<a name=2.4.277>With such a number. What, must I come to you</a><br>
<a name=2.4.278>With five and twenty, Regan? said you so?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech79><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.279>And speak’t again, my lord; no more with me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech80><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.280>Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour’d,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.281>When others are more wicked: not being the worst</a><br>
<a name=2.4.282>Stands in some rank of praise.</a><br>
<p><i>To GONERIL</i></p>
<a name=2.4.283>I’ll go with thee:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.284>Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.285>And thou art twice her love.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech81><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.286>Hear me, my lord;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.287>What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.288>To follow in a house where twice so many</a><br>
<a name=2.4.289>Have a command to tend you?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech82><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.290>What need one?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech83><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.291>O, reason not the need: our basest beggars</a><br>
<a name=2.4.292>Are in the poorest thing superfluous:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.293>Allow not nature more than nature needs,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.294>Man’s life’s as cheap as beast’s: thou art a lady;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.295>If only to go warm were gorgeous,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.296>Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear’st,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.297>Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.298>You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!</a><br>
<a name=2.4.299>You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.300>As full of grief as age; wretched in both!</a><br>
<a name=2.4.301>If it be you that stir these daughters’ hearts</a><br>
<a name=2.4.302>Against their father, fool me not so much</a><br>
<a name=2.4.303>To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.304>And let not women’s weapons, water-drops,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.305>Stain my man’s cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.306>I will have such revenges on you both,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.307>That all the world shall⁠—I will do such things⁠—</a><br>
<a name=2.4.308>What they are, yet I know not: but they shall be</a><br>
<a name=2.4.309>The terrors of the earth. You think I’ll weep</a><br>
<a name=2.4.310>No, I’ll not weep:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.311>I have full cause of weeping; but this heart</a><br>
<a name=2.4.312>Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.313>Or ere I’ll weep. O fool, I shall go mad!</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt KING LEAR, GLOUCESTER, KENT, and Fool</i></p>
<p><i>Storm and tempest</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech84><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.314>Let us withdraw; ’twill be a storm.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech85><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.315>This house is little: the old man and his people</a><br>
<a name=2.4.316>Cannot be well bestow’d.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech86><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.317>’Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.318>And must needs taste his folly.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech87><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.319>For his particular, I’ll receive him gladly,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.320>But not one follower.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech88><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.321>So am I purposed.</a><br>
<a name=2.4.322>Where is my lord of Gloucester?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech89><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.323>Follow’d the old man forth: he is return’d.</a><br>
<p><i>Re-enter GLOUCESTER</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech90><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.324>The king is in high rage.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech91><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.325>Whither is he going?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech92><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.326>He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech93><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.327>’Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech94><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.328>My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech95><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.329>Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds</a><br>
<a name=2.4.330>Do sorely ruffle; for many miles a bout</a><br>
<a name=2.4.331>There’s scarce a bush.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech96><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.332>O, sir, to wilful men,</a><br>
<a name=2.4.333>The injuries that they themselves procure</a><br>
<a name=2.4.334>Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.335>He is attended with a desperate train;</a><br>
<a name=2.4.336>And what they may incense him to, being apt</a><br>
<a name=2.4.337>To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech97><b>CORNWALL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=2.4.338>Shut up your doors, my lord; ’tis a wild night:</a><br>
<a name=2.4.339>My Regan counsels well; come out o’ the storm.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote><p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
