<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear’s</b> palace</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I thought the king had more affected the Duke of Albany than Cornwall.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>It did always seem so to us: but now, in the division of the kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most; for equalities are so weighed, that curiosity in neither can make choice of either’s moiety.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Is not this your son, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge: I have so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am brazed to it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I cannot conceive you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Sir, this young fellow’s mother could: whereupon she grew round-wombed, and had, indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. Do you smell a fault?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>But I have, sir, a son by order of law, some year elder than this, who yet is no dearer in my account: though this knave came something saucily into the world before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair; there was good sport at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged. Do you know this noble gentleman, Edmund?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>No, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>My lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my honourable friend.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>My services to your lordship.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I must love you, and sue to know you better.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Sir, I shall study deserving.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again. The king is coming.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sennet. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cornwall</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>I shall, my liege.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Meantime we shall express our darker purpose.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me the map there. Know that we have divided</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In three our kingdom: and ’tis our fast intent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To shake all cares and business from our age;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Conferring them on younger strengths, while we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unburthen’d crawl toward death. Our son of Cornwall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, our no less loving son of Albany,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have this hour a constant will to publish</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our daughters’ several dowers, that future strife</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May be prevented now. The princes, France and Burgundy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great rivals in our youngest daughter’s love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here are to be answer’d. Tell me, my daughters⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since now we will divest us both of rule,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Interest of territory, cares of state⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which of you shall we say doth love us most?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we our largest bounty may extend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where nature doth with merit challenge. Goneril,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our eldest-born, speak first.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, I love you more than words can wield the matter;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dearer than eye-sight, space, and liberty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond what can be valued, rich or rare;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As much as child e’er loved, or father found;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A love that makes breath poor, and speech unable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond all manner of so much I love you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> What shall Cordelia do? Love, and be silent.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With shadowy forests and with champains rich’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We make thee lady: to thine and Albany’s issue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be this perpetual. What says our second daughter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sir, I am made</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the self-same metal that my sister is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And prize me at her worth. In my true heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I find she names my very deed of love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Only she comes too short: that I profess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself an enemy to all other joys,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which the most precious square of sense possesses;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And find I am alone felicitate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In your dear highness’ love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Aside.</i> Then poor Cordelia!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet not so; since, I am sure, my love’s</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More richer than my tongue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To thee and thine hereditary ever</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No less in space, validity, and pleasure,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than that conferr’d on Goneril. Now, our joy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Although the last, not least; to whose young love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The vines of France and milk of Burgundy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strive to be interess’d; what can you say to draw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A third more opulent than your sisters? Speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td>Nothing, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Nothing!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td>Nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Nothing will come of nothing: speak again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>According to my bond; nor more nor less.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How, how, Cordelia! mend your speech a little,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest it may mar your fortunes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Return those duties back as are right fit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Obey you, love you, and most honour you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why have my sisters husbands, if they say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They love you all? Haply, when I shall wed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Half my love with him, half my care and duty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sure, I shall never marry like my sisters,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To love my father all.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>But goes thy heart with this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td>Ay, good my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>So young, and so untender?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td>So young, my lord, and true.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let it be so; thy truth, then, be thy dower:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, by the sacred radiance of the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mysteries of Hecate, and the night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all the operation of the orbs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whom we do exist, and cease to be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here I disclaim all my paternal care,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Propinquity and property of blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as a stranger to my heart and me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hold thee, from this, for ever. The barbarous Scythian,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or he that makes his generation messes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be as well neighbour’d, pitied, and relieved,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou my sometime daughter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Good my liege⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace, Kent!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come not between the dragon and his wrath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I loved her most, and thought to set my rest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On her kind nursery. Hence, and avoid my sight!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So be my grave my peace, as here I give</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her father’s heart from her! Call France; who stirs?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call Burgundy. Cornwall and Albany,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With my two daughters’ dowers digest this third:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do invest you jointly with my power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pre-eminence, and all the large effects</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That troop with majesty. Ourself, by monthly course,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With reservation of an hundred knights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By you to be sustain’d, shall our abode</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make with you by due turns. Only we still retain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The name, and all the additions to a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beloved sons, be yours: which to confirm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This coronet part betwixt you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Giving the crown.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Royal Lear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom I have ever honour’d as my king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Loved as my father, as my master follow’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As my great patron thought on in my prayers⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The bow is bent and drawn, make from the shaft.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let it fall rather, though the fork invade</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The region of my heart: be Kent unmannerly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When Lear is mad. What wilt thou do, old man?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Think’st thou that duty shall have dread to speak,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour’s bound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When majesty stoops to folly. Reverse thy doom;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in thy best consideration, cheque</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This hideous rashness: answer my life my judgment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reverbs no hollowness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Kent, on thy life, no more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My life I never held but as a pawn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wage against thy enemies; nor fear to lose it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy safety being the motive.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Out of my sight!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See better, Lear; and let me still remain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The true blank of thine eye.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Now, by Apollo⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, by Apollo, king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou swear’st thy gods in vain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>O, vassal! miscreant! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laying his hand on his sword.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr class="together">
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany<br/>
							Cornwall</td>
							<td>Dear sir, forbear.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon thy foul disease. Revoke thy doom;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll tell thee thou dost evil.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hear me, recreant!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On thine allegiance, hear me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thou hast sought to make us break our vow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which we durst never yet, and with strain’d pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To come between our sentence and our power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which nor our nature nor our place can bear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our potency made good, take thy reward.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Five days we do allot thee, for provision</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To shield thee from diseases of the world;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on the sixth to turn thy hated back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon our kingdom: if, on the tenth day following,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy banish’d trunk be found in our dominions,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The moment is thy death. Away! by Jupiter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This shall not be revoked.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fare thee well, king: sith thus thou wilt appear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</b>.</i> The gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That justly think’st, and hast most rightly said!</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>.</i> And your large speeches may your deeds approve,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That good effects may spring from words of love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’ll shape his old course in a country new. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Here’s France and Burgundy, my noble lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord of Burgundy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We first address towards you, who with this king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath rivall’d for our daughter: what, in the least,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will you require in present dower with her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or cease your quest of love?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Most royal majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I crave no more than what your highness offer’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor will you tender less.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Right noble Burgundy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When she was dear to us, we did hold her so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now her price is fall’n. Sir, there she stands:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If aught within that little seeming substance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And nothing more, may fitly like your grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She’s there, and she is yours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</td>
							<td>I know no answer.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Will you, with those infirmities she owes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unfriended, new-adopted to our hate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dower’d with our curse, and stranger’d with our oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take her, or leave her?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pardon me, royal sir;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Election makes not up on such conditions.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then leave her, sir; for, by the power that made me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I tell you all her wealth. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</b>.</i> For you, great king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would not from your love make such a stray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To match you where I hate; therefore beseech you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To avert your liking a more worthier way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Almost to acknowledge hers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This is most strange,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she, that even but now was your best object,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The argument of your praise, balm of your age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commit a thing so monstrous, to dismantle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So many folds of favour. Sure, her offence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must be of such unnatural degree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That monsters it, or your fore-vouch’d affection</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall’n into taint: which to believe of her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must be a faith that reason without miracle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could never plant in me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I yet beseech your majesty⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If for I want that glib and oily art,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To speak and purpose not; since what I well intend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll do’t before I speak⁠—that you make known</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No unchaste action, or dishonour’d step,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hath deprived me of your grace and favour;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But even for want of that for which I am richer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A still-soliciting eye, and such a tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I am glad I have not, though not to have it</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath lost me in your liking.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Better thou</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hadst not been born than not to have pleased me better.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is it but this⁠—a tardiness in nature</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which often leaves the history unspoke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it intends to do? My lord of Burgundy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What say you to the lady? Love’s not love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When it is mingled with regards that stand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Aloof from the entire point. Will you have her?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is herself a dowry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Royal Lear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give but that portion which yourself proposed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here I take Cordelia by the hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Duchess of Burgundy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Nothing: I have sworn; I am firm.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you must lose a husband.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Peace be with Burgundy!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since that respects of fortune are his love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I shall not be his wife.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Most choice, forsaken; and most loved, despised!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it lawful I take up what’s cast away.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Gods, gods! ’tis strange that from their cold’st neglect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My love should kindle to inflamed respect.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou losest here, a better where to find.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou hast her, France: let her be thine; for we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That face of hers again. Therefore be gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Without our grace, our love, our benison.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, noble Burgundy. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</td>
							<td>Bid farewell to your sisters.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The jewels of our father, with wash’d eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And like a sister am most loath to call</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your faults as they are named. Use well our father:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To your professed bosoms I commit him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet, alas, stood I within his grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would prefer him to a better place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, farewell to you both.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</td>
							<td>Prescribe not us our duties.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let your study</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be to content your lord, who hath received you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At fortune’s alms. You have obedience scanted,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And well are worth the want that you have wanted.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Time shall unfold what plaited cunning hides:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well may you prosper!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</td>
							<td>Come, my fair Cordelia. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of France</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Cordelia</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both. I think our father will hence to-night.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</td>
							<td>That’s most certain, and with you; next month with us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>You see how full of changes his age is; the observation we have made of it hath not been little: he always loved our sister most; and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off appears too grossly.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</td>
							<td>’Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash; then must we look to receive from his age, not alone the imperfections of long-engraffed condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</td>
							<td>Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent’s banishment.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>There is further compliment of leavetaking between France and him. Pray you, let’s hit together: if our father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Regan</td>
							<td>We shall further think on’t.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>We must do something, and i’ the heat. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Earl of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester’s</b> castle</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</b>, with a letter.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou, nature, art my goddess; to thy law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My services are bound. Wherefore should I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand in the plague of custom, and permit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The curiosity of nations to deprive me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that I am some twelve or fourteen moon-shines</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lag of a brother? Why bastard? wherefore base?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When my dimensions are as well compact,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mind as generous, and my shape as true,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As honest madam’s issue? Why brand they us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, in the lusty stealth of nature, take</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More composition and fierce quality</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than doth, within a dull, stale, tired bed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to the creating a whole tribe of fops,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Got ’tween asleep and wake? Well, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Legitimate Edgar, I must have your land:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our father’s love is to the bastard Edmund</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As to the legitimate: fine word⁠—legitimate!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well, my legitimate, if this letter speed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And my invention thrive, Edmund the base</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall top the legitimate. I grow; I prosper:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, gods, stand up for bastards!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Kent banish’d thus! and France in choler parted!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the king gone to-night! subscribed his power!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Confined to exhibition! All this done</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the gad! Edmund, how now! what news?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>So please your lordship, none. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Putting up the letter.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I know no news, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>What paper were you reading?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Nothing, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>No? What needed, then, that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. Let’s see: come, if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I beseech you, sir, pardon me: it is a letter from my brother, that I have not all o’er-read; and for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your o’er-looking.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Give me the letter, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I shall offend, either to detain or give it. The contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Let’s see, let’s see.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I hope, for my brother’s justification, he wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i>
								<span epub:type="z3998:letter">“This policy and reverence of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times; keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them. I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny; who sways, not as it hath power, but as it is suffered. Come to me, that of this I may speak more. If our father would sleep till I waked him, you should half his revenue for ever, and live the beloved of your brother, <span epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Edgar</span>.”</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Hum⁠—conspiracy!⁠—“Sleep till I waked him⁠—you should enjoy half his revenue,”⁠—My son Edgar! Had he a hand to write this? a heart and brain to breed it in?⁠—When came this to you? who brought it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>It was not brought me, my lord; there’s the cunning of it; I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>You know the character to be your brother’s?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his; but, in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>It is his.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>It is his hand, my lord; but I hope his heart is not in the contents.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Hath he never heretofore sounded you in this business?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Never, my lord: but I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit, that, sons at perfect age, and fathers declining, the father should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>O villain, villain! His very opinion in the letter! Abhorred villain! Unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than brutish! Go, sirrah, seek him; I’ll apprehend him: abominable villain! Where is he?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I do not well know, my lord. If it shall please you to suspend your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain course; where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honour, and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience. I dare pawn down my life for him, that he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honour, and to no further pretence of danger.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Think you so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>If your honour judge it meet, I will place you where you shall hear us confer of this, and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction; and that without any further delay than this very evening.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>He cannot be such a monster⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Nor is not, sure.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him. Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out: wind me into him, I pray you: frame the business after your own wisdom. I would unstate myself, to be in a due resolution.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I will seek him, sir, presently: convey the business as I shall find means and acquaint you withal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us: though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects: love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide: in cities, mutinies; in countries, discord; in palaces, treason; and the bond cracked ’twixt son and father. This villain of mine comes under the prediction; there’s son against father: the king falls from bias of nature; there’s father against child. We have seen the best of our time: machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders, follow us disquietly to our graves. Find out this villain, Edmund; it shall lose thee nothing; do it carefully. And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his offence, honesty! ’Tis strange. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>This is the excellent foppery of the world, that, when we are sick in fortune⁠—often the surfeit of our own behavior⁠—we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars: as if we were villains by necessity; fools by heavenly compulsion; knaves, thieves, and treachers, by spherical predominance; drunkards, liars, and adulterers, by an enforced obedience of planetary influence; and all that we are evil in, by a divine thrusting on: an admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! My father compounded with my mother under the dragon’s tail; and my nativity was under Ursa major; so that it follows, I am rough and lecherous. Tut, I should have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing. Edgar⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>And pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old comedy: my cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o’ Bedlam. O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa, sol, la, mi.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>How now, brother Edmund! what serious contemplation are you in?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>Do you busy yourself about that?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily; as of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against king and nobles; needless diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and I know not what.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>How long have you been a sectary astronomical?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Come, come; when saw you my father last?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>Why, the night gone by.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Spake you with him?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>Ay, two hours together.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>None at all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him: and at my entreaty forbear his presence till some little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure; which at this instant so rageth in him, that with the mischief of your person it would scarcely allay.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>Some villain hath done me wrong.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>That’s my fear. I pray you, have a continent forbearance till the spied of his rage goes slower; and, as I say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak: pray ye, go; there’s my key: if you do stir abroad, go armed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>Armed, brother!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>Brother, I advise you to the best; go armed: I am no honest man if there be any good meaning towards you: I have told you what I have seen and heard; but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it: pray you, away.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</td>
							<td>Shall I hear from you anon?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Edmund</td>
							<td>I do serve you in this business. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Edgar</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>A credulous father! and a brother noble, Whose nature is so far from doing harms, That he suspects none: on whose foolish honesty My practises ride easy! I see the business. Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit: All with me’s meet that I can fashion fit. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Duke of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany’s</b> palace</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</b>, her steward.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>Yes, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By day and night he wrongs me; every hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He flashes into one gross crime or other,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sets us all at odds: I’ll not endure it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On every trifle. When he returns from hunting,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not speak with him; say I am sick:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you come slack of former services,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You shall do well; the fault of it I’ll answer.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>He’s coming, madam; I hear him. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Horns within.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Put on what weary negligence you please,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You and your fellows; I’ll have it come to question:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he dislike it, let him to our sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose mind and mine, I know, in that are one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not to be over-ruled. Idle old man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That still would manage those authorities</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he hath given away! Now, by my life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Old fools are babes again; and must be used</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With cheques as flatteries⁠—when they are seen abused.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Remember what I tell you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>Well, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And let his knights have colder looks among you;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What grows of it, no matter; advise your fellows so:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would breed from hence occasions, and I shall,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I may speak: I’ll write straight to my sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hold my very course. Prepare for dinner. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A hall in the same</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>, disguised.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If but as well I other accents borrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That can my speech defuse, my good intent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May carry through itself to that full issue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For which I razed my likeness. Now, banish’d Kent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So may it come, thy master, whom thou lovest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall find thee full of labours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Horns within. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</b>, Knights, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit an Attendant.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>How now! what art thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>A man, sir.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>What dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I do profess to be no less than I seem; to serve him truly that will put me in trust: to love him that is honest; to converse with him that is wise, and says little; to fear judgment; to fight when I cannot choose; and to eat no fish.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>What art thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a king, thou art poor enough. What wouldst thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Service.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Who wouldst thou serve?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>You.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Dost thou know me, fellow?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>No, sir; but you have that in your countenance which I would fain call master.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>What’s that?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Authority.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>What services canst thou do?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly: that which ordinary men are fit for, I am qualified in; and the best of me is diligence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>How old art thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for any thing: I have years on my back forty eight.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Follow me; thou shalt serve me: if I like thee no worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet. Dinner, ho, dinner! Where’s my knave? my fool? Go you, and call my fool hither. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit an Attendant.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>You, you, sirrah, where’s my daughter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>So please you⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit a Knight.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Where’s my fool, ho? I think the world’s asleep.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter Knight.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>How now! where’s that mongrel?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
							<td>He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Why came not the slave back to me when I called him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
							<td>Sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he would not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>He would not!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
							<td>My lord, I know not what the matter is; but, to my judgment, your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont; there’s a great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants as in the duke himself also and your daughter.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Ha! sayest thou so?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
							<td>I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken; for my duty cannot be silent when I think your highness wronged.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception: I have perceived a most faint neglect of late; which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence and purpose of unkindness: I will look further into’t. But where’s my fool? I have not seen him this two days.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Knight</td>
							<td>Since my young lady’s going into France, sir, the fool hath much pined away.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>No more of that; I have noted it well. Go you, and tell my daughter I would speak with her. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit an Attendant.</i> Go you, call hither my fool. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit an Attendant.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>O, you sir, you, come you hither, sir: who am I, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>My lady’s father.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>“My lady’s father”! my lord’s knave: your whoreson dog! you slave! you cur!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>I am none of these, my lord; I beseech your pardon.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Striking him.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>I’ll not be struck, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Nor tripped neither, you base football player. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tripping up his heels.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>I thank thee, fellow; thou servest me, and I’ll love thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Come, sir, arise, away! I’ll teach you differences: away, away! if you will measure your lubber’s length again, tarry: but away! go to; have you wisdom? so. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pushes <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</b> out.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there’s earnest of thy service. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Giving <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b> money.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Let me hire him too: here’s my coxcomb. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Offering <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b> his cap.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>How now, my pretty knave! how dost thou?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>Why, fool?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Why, for taking one’s part that’s out of favour: nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou’lt catch cold shortly: there, take my coxcomb: why, this fellow has banished two on’s daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will; if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb. How now, nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Why, my boy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>If I gave them all my living, I’ld keep my coxcombs myself. There’s mine; beg another of thy daughters.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Take heed, sirrah; the whip.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Truth’s a dog must to kennel; he must be whipped out, when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and stink.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>A pestilent gall to me!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Sirrah, I’ll teach thee a speech.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Do.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mark it, nuncle:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have more than thou showest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak less than thou knowest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lend less than thou owest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ride more than thou goest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Learn more than thou trowest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set less than thou throwest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leave thy drink and thy whore,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And keep in-a-door,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou shalt have more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than two tens to a score.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>This is nothing, fool.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Then ’tis like the breath of an unfee’d lawyer; you gave me nothing for’t. Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Why, no, boy; nothing can be made out of nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>.</i> Prithee, tell him, so much the rent of his land comes to: he will not believe a fool.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>A bitter fool!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet fool?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>No, lad; teach me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That lord that counsell’d thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give away thy land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come place him here by me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do thou for him stand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sweet and bitter fool</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will presently appear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one in motley here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other found out there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Dost thou call me fool, boy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>All thy other titles thou hast given away; that thou wast born with.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>This is not altogether fool, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>No, faith, lords and great men will not let me; if I had a monopoly out, they would have part on’t: and ladies too, they will not let me have all fool to myself; they’ll be snatching. Give me an egg, nuncle, and I’ll give thee two crowns.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>What two crowns shall they be?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Why, after I have cut the egg i’ the middle, and eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. When thou clovest thy crown i’ the middle, and gavest away both parts, thou borest thy ass on thy back o’er the dirt: thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown, when thou gavest thy golden one away. If I speak like myself in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Singing.</i> Fools had ne’er less wit in a year;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For wise men are grown foppish,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They know not how their wits to wear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their manners are so apish.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>When were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>I have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy daughters thy mothers: for when thou gavest them the rod, and put’st down thine own breeches,</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Singing.</i> Then they for sudden joy did weep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I for sorrow sung,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That such a king should play bo-peep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And go the fools among.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie: I would fain learn to lie.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>An you lie, sirrah, we’ll have you whipped.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are: they’ll have me whipped for speaking true, thou’lt have me whipped for lying; and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace. I had rather be any kind o’ thing than a fool: and yet I would not be thee, nuncle; thou hast pared thy wit o’ both sides, and left nothing i’ the middle: here comes one o’ the parings.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>How now, daughter! what makes that frontlet on? Methinks you are too much of late i’ the frown.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frowning; now thou art an O without a figure: I am better than thou art now; I am a fool, thou art nothing. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>.</i> Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue; so your face bids me, though you say nothing.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Mum, mum, He that keeps nor crust nor crum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weary of all, shall want some.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pointing to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</b>.</i> That’s a shealed peascod.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But other of your insolent retinue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do hourly carp and quarrel; breaking forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In rank and not-to-be endured riots. Sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I had thought, by making this well known unto you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have found a safe redress; but now grow fearful,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By what yourself too late have spoke and done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you protect this course, and put it on</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By your allowance; which if you should, the fault</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would not ’scape censure, nor the redresses sleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which, in the tender of a wholesome weal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might in their working do you that offence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which else were shame, that then necessity</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will call discreet proceeding.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For, you trow, nuncle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it’s had it head bit off by it young.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, out went the candle, and we were left darkling.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Are you our daughter?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, sir,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would you would make use of that good wisdom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whereof I know you are fraught; and put away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These dispositions, that of late transform you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From what you rightly are.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? Whoop, Jug! I love thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Doth any here know me? This is not Lear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either his notion weakens, his discernings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are lethargied⁠—Ha! waking? ’tis not so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who is it that can tell me who I am?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Lear’s shadow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>I would learn that; for, by the marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded I had daughters.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Which they will make an obedient father.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Your name, fair gentlewoman?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This admiration, sir, is much o’ the savour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of other your new pranks. I do beseech you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To understand my purposes aright:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Men so disorder’d, so debosh’d and bold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That this our court, infected with their manners,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shows like a riotous inn: epicurism and lust</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make it more like a tavern or a brothel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than a graced palace. The shame itself doth speak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For instant remedy: be then desired</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By her, that else will take the thing she begs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A little to disquantity your train;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the remainder, that shall still depend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be such men as may besort your age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And know themselves and you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Darkness and devils!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Saddle my horses; call my train together:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Degenerate bastard! I’ll not trouble thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet have I left a daughter.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You strike my people; and your disorder’d rabble</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make servants of their betters.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Woe, that too late repents⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</b>.</i> O, sir, are you come?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is it your will? Speak, sir. Prepare my horses.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than the sea-monster!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td>Pray, sir, be patient.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>.</i> Detested kite! thou liest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My train are men of choice and rarest parts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That all particulars of duty know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the most exact regard support</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The worships of their name. O most small fault,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, like an engine, wrench’d my frame of nature</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From the fix’d place; drew from heart all love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Striking his head.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of what hath moved you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It may be so, my lord.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hear, nature, hear; dear goddess, hear!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make this creature fruitful!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into her womb convey sterility!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dry up in her the organs of increase;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from her derogate body never spring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A babe to honour her! If she must teem,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Create her child of spleen; that it may live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be a thwart disnatured torment to her!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To laughter and contempt; that she may feel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have a thankless child! Away, away! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td>Now, gods that we adore, whereof comes this?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Never afflict yourself to know the cause;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But let his disposition have that scope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That dotage gives it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, fifty of my followers at a clap!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within a fortnight!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td>What’s the matter, sir?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll tell thee: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Life and death! I am ashamed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thou hast power to shake my manhood thus;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That these hot tears, which break from me perforce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should make thee worth them. Blasts and fogs upon thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The untented woundings of a father’s curse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pierce every sense about thee! Old fond eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beweep this cause again, I’ll pluck ye out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cast you, with the waters that you lose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To temper clay. Yea, it is come to this?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let is be so: yet have I left a daughter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She’ll flay thy wolvish visage. Thou shalt find</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I’ll resume the shape which thou dost think</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have cast off for ever: thou shalt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I warrant thee. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>, and Attendants.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>Do you mark that, my lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I cannot be so partial, Goneril,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the great love I bear you⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>Pray you, content. What, Oswald, ho! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</b>.</i> You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool</span>
									<br/>
									<span>with thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A fox, when one has caught her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And such a daughter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should sure to the slaughter,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If my cap would buy a halter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So the fool follows after. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This man hath had good counsel:⁠—a hundred knights!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis politic and safe to let him keep</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At point a hundred knights: yes, that, on every dream,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He may enguard his dotage with their powers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hold our lives in mercy. Oswald, I say!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td>Well, you may fear too far.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Safer than trust too far:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me still take away the harms I fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What he hath utter’d I have writ my sister</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she sustain him and his hundred knights</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I have show’d the unfitness⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How now, Oswald!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, have you writ that letter to my sister?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</td>
							<td>Yes, madam.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take you some company, and away to horse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Inform her full of my particular fear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thereto add such reasons of your own</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As may compact it more. Get you gone;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hasten your return. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oswald</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No, no, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This milky gentleness and course of yours</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are much more attask’d for want of wisdom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than praised for harmful mildness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How far your eyes may pierce I can not tell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Striving to better, oft we mar what’s well.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Goneril</td>
							<td>Nay, then⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Albany</td>
							<td>Well, well; the event. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Court before the same</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go you before to Gloucester with these letters.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>know than comes from her demand out of the letter.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Kent</td>
							<td>I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>If a man’s brains were in’s heels, were’t not in danger of kibes?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Ay, boy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Then, I prithee, be merry; thy wit shall ne’er go slip-shod.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Ha, ha, ha!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly; for though she’s as like this as a crab’s like an apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>She will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. Thou canst tell why one’s nose stands i’ the middle on’s face?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Why, to keep one’s eyes of either side’s nose; that what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>I did her wrong⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>No.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Why?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Why, to put his head in; not to give it away to his daughters, and leave his horns without a case.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>I will forget my nature. So kind a father! Be my horses ready?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Thy asses are gone about ’em. The reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Because they are not eight?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>To take ’t again perforce! Monster ingratitude!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I’ld have thee beaten for being old before thy time.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>How’s that?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven Keep me in temper: I would not be mad!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Gentleman.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>How now! are the horses ready?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gentleman</td>
							<td>Ready, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Lear</td>
							<td>Come, boy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fool</td>
							<td>She that’s a maid now, and laughs at my departure, Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
