<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
<h3>SCENE I. The heath.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter EDGAR</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.1>Yet better thus, and known to be contemn’d,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.2>Than still contemn’d and flatter’d. To be worst,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.3>The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.4>Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:</a><br>
<a name=4.1.5>The lamentable change is from the best;</a><br>
<a name=4.1.6>The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.7>Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace!</a><br>
<a name=4.1.8>The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst</a><br>
<a name=4.1.9>Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?</a><br>
<p><i>Enter GLOUCESTER, led by an Old Man</i></p>
<a name=4.1.10>My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!</a><br>
<a name=4.1.11>But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.12>Lie would not yield to age.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.13>O, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and</a><br>
<a name=4.1.14>your father’s tenant, these fourscore years.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.15>Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone:</a><br>
<a name=4.1.16>Thy comforts can do me no good at all;</a><br>
<a name=4.1.17>Thee they may hurt.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.18>Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.19>I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;</a><br>
<a name=4.1.20>I stumbled when I saw: full oft ’tis seen,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.21>Our means secure us, and our mere defects</a><br>
<a name=4.1.22>Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.23>The food of thy abused father’s wrath!</a><br>
<a name=4.1.24>Might I but live to see thee in my touch,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.25>I’ld say I had eyes again!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.26>How now! Who’s there?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.27>[Aside] O gods! Who is’t can say ‘I am at</a><br>
<a name=4.1.28>the worst’?</a><br>
<a name=4.1.29>I am worse than e’er I was.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.30>’Tis poor mad Tom.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.31>[Aside] And worse I may be yet: the worst is not</a><br>
<a name=4.1.32>So long as we can say ‘This is the worst.’</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.33>Fellow, where goest?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.34>Is it a beggar-man?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.35>Madman and beggar too.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.36>He has some reason, else he could not beg.</a><br>
<a name=4.1.37>I’ the last night’s storm I such a fellow saw;</a><br>
<a name=4.1.38>Which made me think a man a worm: my son</a><br>
<a name=4.1.39>Came then into my mind; and yet my mind</a><br>
<a name=4.1.40>Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard</a><br>
<a name=4.1.41>more since.</a><br>
<a name=4.1.42>As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods.</a><br>
<a name=4.1.43>They kill us for their sport.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.44>[Aside]	How should this be?</a><br>
<a name=4.1.45>Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.46>Angering itself and others.⁠—Bless thee, master!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.47>Is that the naked fellow?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.48>Ay, my lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.49>Then, prithee, get thee gone: if, for my sake,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.50>Thou wilt o’ertake us, hence a mile or twain,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.51>I’ the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;</a><br>
<a name=4.1.52>And bring some covering for this naked soul,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.53>Who I’ll entreat to lead me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.54>Alack, sir, he is mad.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.55>’Tis the times’ plague, when madmen lead the blind.</a><br>
<a name=4.1.56>Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;</a><br>
<a name=4.1.57>Above the rest, be gone.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>Old Man</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.58>I’ll bring him the best ‘parel that I have,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.59>Come on’t what will.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.60>Sirrah, naked fellow⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.61>Poor Tom’s a-cold.</a><br>
<p><i>Aside</i></p>
<a name=4.1.62>I cannot daub it further.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.63>Come hither, fellow.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.64>[Aside] And yet I must.⁠—Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.65>Know’st thou the way to Dover?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.66>Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor</a><br>
<a name=4.1.67>Tom hath been scared out of his good wits: bless</a><br>
<a name=4.1.68>thee, good man’s son, from the foul fiend! five</a><br>
<a name=4.1.69>fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of lust, as</a><br>
<a name=4.1.70>Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of</a><br>
<a name=4.1.71>stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of</a><br>
<a name=4.1.72>mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids</a><br>
<a name=4.1.73>and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.74>Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens’ plagues</a><br>
<a name=4.1.75>Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched</a><br>
<a name=4.1.76>Makes thee the happier: heavens, deal so still!</a><br>
<a name=4.1.77>Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.78>That slaves your ordinance, that will not see</a><br>
<a name=4.1.79>Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly;</a><br>
<a name=4.1.80>So distribution should undo excess,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.81>And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.82>Ay, master.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.83>There is a cliff, whose high and bending head</a><br>
<a name=4.1.84>Looks fearfully in the confined deep:</a><br>
<a name=4.1.85>Bring me but to the very brim of it,</a><br>
<a name=4.1.86>And I’ll repair the misery thou dost bear</a><br>
<a name=4.1.87>With something rich about me: from that place</a><br>
<a name=4.1.88>I shall no leading need.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.1.89>Give me thy arm:</a><br>
<a name=4.1.90>Poor Tom shall lead thee.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. Before ALBANY’s palace.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter GONERIL and EDMUND</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.1>Welcome, my lord: I marvel our mild husband</a><br>
<a name=4.2.2>Not met us on the way.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter OSWALD</i></p>
<a name=4.2.3>Now, where’s your master’?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.4>Madam, within; but never man so changed.</a><br>
<a name=4.2.5>I told him of the army that was landed;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.6>He smiled at it: I told him you were coming:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.7>His answer was ‘The worse:’ of Gloucester’s treachery,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.8>And of the loyal service of his son,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.9>When I inform’d him, then he call’d me sot,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.10>And told me I had turn’d the wrong side out:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.11>What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.12>What like, offensive.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.13>[To EDMUND] Then shall you go no further.</a><br>
<a name=4.2.14>It is the cowish terror of his spirit,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.15>That dares not undertake: he’ll not feel wrongs</a><br>
<a name=4.2.16>Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way</a><br>
<a name=4.2.17>May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.18>Hasten his musters and conduct his powers:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.19>I must change arms at home, and give the distaff</a><br>
<a name=4.2.20>Into my husband’s hands. This trusty servant</a><br>
<a name=4.2.21>Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.22>If you dare venture in your own behalf,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.23>A mistress’s command. Wear this; spare speech;</a><br>
<p><i>Giving a favour</i></p>
<a name=4.2.24>Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.25>Would stretch thy spirits up into the air:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.26>Conceive, and fare thee well.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.27>Yours in the ranks of death.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.28>My most dear Gloucester!</a><br>
<p><i>Exit EDMUND</i></p>
<a name=4.2.29>O, the difference of man and man!</a><br>
<a name=4.2.30>To thee a woman’s services are due:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.31>My fool usurps my body.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.32>Madam, here comes my lord.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
<p><i>Enter ALBANY</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.33>I have been worth the whistle.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.34>O Goneril!</a><br>
<a name=4.2.35>You are not worth the dust which the rude wind</a><br>
<a name=4.2.36>Blows in your face. I fear your disposition:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.37>That nature, which contemns its origin,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.38>Cannot be border’d certain in itself;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.39>She that herself will sliver and disbranch</a><br>
<a name=4.2.40>From her material sap, perforce must wither</a><br>
<a name=4.2.41>And come to deadly use.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.42>No more; the text is foolish.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.43>Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.44>Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?</a><br>
<a name=4.2.45>Tigers, not daughters, what have you perform’d?</a><br>
<a name=4.2.46>A father, and a gracious aged man,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.47>Whose reverence even the head-lugg’d bear would lick,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.48>Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded.</a><br>
<a name=4.2.49>Could my good brother suffer you to do it?</a><br>
<a name=4.2.50>A man, a prince, by him so benefited!</a><br>
<a name=4.2.51>If that the heavens do not their visible spirits</a><br>
<a name=4.2.52>Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.53>It will come,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.54>Humanity must perforce prey on itself,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.55>Like monsters of the deep.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.56>Milk-liver’d man!</a><br>
<a name=4.2.57>That bear’st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.58>Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning</a><br>
<a name=4.2.59>Thine honour from thy suffering; that not know’st</a><br>
<a name=4.2.60>Fools do those villains pity who are punish’d</a><br>
<a name=4.2.61>Ere they have done their mischief. Where’s thy drum?</a><br>
<a name=4.2.62>France spreads his banners in our noiseless land;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.63>With plumed helm thy slayer begins threats;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.64>Whiles thou, a moral fool, sit’st still, and criest</a><br>
<a name=4.2.65>‘Alack, why does he so?’</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.66>See thyself, devil!</a><br>
<a name=4.2.67>Proper deformity seems not in the fiend</a><br>
<a name=4.2.68>So horrid as in woman.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.69>O vain fool!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.70>Thou changed and self-cover’d thing, for shame,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.71>Be-monster not thy feature. Were’t my fitness</a><br>
<a name=4.2.72>To let these hands obey my blood,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.73>They are apt enough to dislocate and tear</a><br>
<a name=4.2.74>Thy flesh and bones: howe’er thou art a fiend,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.75>A woman’s shape doth shield thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.76>Marry, your manhood now⁠—</a><br>
<p><i>Enter a Messenger</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.77>What news?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>Messenger</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.78>O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall’s dead:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.79>Slain by his servant, going to put out</a><br>
<a name=4.2.80>The other eye of Gloucester.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.81>Gloucester’s eye!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>Messenger</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.82>A servant that he bred, thrill’d with remorse,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.83>Opposed against the act, bending his sword</a><br>
<a name=4.2.84>To his great master; who, thereat enraged,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.85>Flew on him, and amongst them fell’d him dead;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.86>But not without that harmful stroke, which since</a><br>
<a name=4.2.87>Hath pluck’d him after.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.88>This shows you are above,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.89>You justicers, that these our nether crimes</a><br>
<a name=4.2.90>So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!</a><br>
<a name=4.2.91>Lost he his other eye?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>Messenger</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.92>Both, both, my lord.</a><br>
<a name=4.2.93>This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.94>’Tis from your sister.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.95>[Aside] One way I like this well;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.96>But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.97>May all the building in my fancy pluck</a><br>
<a name=4.2.98>Upon my hateful life: another way,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.99>The news is not so tart.⁠—I’ll read, and answer.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.100>Where was his son when they did take his eyes?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>Messenger</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.101>Come with my lady hither.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.102>He is not here.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>Messenger</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.103>No, my good lord; I met him back again.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.104>Knows he the wickedness?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>Messenger</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.105>Ay, my good lord; ’twas he inform’d against him;</a><br>
<a name=4.2.106>And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment</a><br>
<a name=4.2.107>Might have the freer course.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.2.108>Gloucester, I live</a><br>
<a name=4.2.109>To thank thee for the love thou show’dst the king,</a><br>
<a name=4.2.110>And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend:</a><br>
<a name=4.2.111>Tell me what more thou know’st.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. The French camp near Dover.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter KENT and a Gentleman</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.1>Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back</a><br>
<a name=4.3.2>know you the reason?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.3>Something he left imperfect in the</a><br>
<a name=4.3.4>state, which since his coming forth is thought</a><br>
<a name=4.3.5>of; which imports to the kingdom so much</a><br>
<a name=4.3.6>fear and danger, that his personal return was</a><br>
<a name=4.3.7>most required and necessary.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.8>Who hath he left behind him general?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.9>The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.10>Did your letters pierce the queen to any</a><br>
<a name=4.3.11>demonstration of grief?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.12>Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence;</a><br>
<a name=4.3.13>And now and then an ample tear trill’d down</a><br>
<a name=4.3.14>Her delicate cheek: it seem’d she was a queen</a><br>
<a name=4.3.15>Over her passion; who, most rebel-like,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.16>Sought to be king o’er her.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.17>O, then it moved her.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.18>Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove</a><br>
<a name=4.3.19>Who should express her goodliest. You have seen</a><br>
<a name=4.3.20>Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears</a><br>
<a name=4.3.21>Were like a better way: those happy smilets,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.22>That play’d on her ripe lip, seem’d not to know</a><br>
<a name=4.3.23>What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.24>As pearls from diamonds dropp’d. In brief,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.25>Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.26>If all could so become it.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.27>Made she no verbal question?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.28>‘Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of ‘father’</a><br>
<a name=4.3.29>Pantingly forth, as if it press’d her heart:</a><br>
<a name=4.3.30>Cried ‘Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters!</a><br>
<a name=4.3.31>Kent! father! sisters! What, i’ the storm? i’ the night?</a><br>
<a name=4.3.32>Let pity not be believed!’ There she shook</a><br>
<a name=4.3.33>The holy water from her heavenly eyes,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.34>And clamour moisten’d: then away she started</a><br>
<a name=4.3.35>To deal with grief alone.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.36>It is the stars,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.37>The stars above us, govern our conditions;</a><br>
<a name=4.3.38>Else one self mate and mate could not beget</a><br>
<a name=4.3.39>Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.40>No.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.41>Was this before the king return’d?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.42>No, since.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.43>Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear’s i’ the town;</a><br>
<a name=4.3.44>Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers</a><br>
<a name=4.3.45>What we are come about, and by no means</a><br>
<a name=4.3.46>Will yield to see his daughter.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.47>Why, good sir?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.48>A sovereign shame so elbows him: his own unkindness,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.49>That stripp’d her from his benediction, turn’d her</a><br>
<a name=4.3.50>To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights</a><br>
<a name=4.3.51>To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting</a><br>
<a name=4.3.52>His mind so venomously, that burning shame</a><br>
<a name=4.3.53>Detains him from Cordelia.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.54>Alack, poor gentleman!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.55>Of Albany’s and Cornwall’s powers you heard not?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.56>’Tis so, they are afoot.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.3.57>Well, sir, I’ll bring you to our master Lear,</a><br>
<a name=4.3.58>And leave you to attend him: some dear cause</a><br>
<a name=4.3.59>Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;</a><br>
<a name=4.3.60>When I am known aright, you shall not grieve</a><br>
<a name=4.3.61>Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go</a><br>
<a name=4.3.62>Along with me.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE IV. The same. A tent.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter, with drum and colours, CORDELIA, Doctor, and Soldiers</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.4.1>Alack, ’tis he: why, he was met even now</a><br>
<a name=4.4.2>As mad as the vex’d sea; singing aloud;</a><br>
<a name=4.4.3>Crown’d with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.4>With bur-docks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.5>Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow</a><br>
<a name=4.4.6>In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;</a><br>
<a name=4.4.7>Search every acre in the high-grown field,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.8>And bring him to our eye.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit an Officer</i></p>
<a name=4.4.9>What can man’s wisdom</a><br>
<a name=4.4.10>In the restoring his bereaved sense?</a><br>
<a name=4.4.11>He that helps him take all my outward worth.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.4.12>There is means, madam:</a><br>
<a name=4.4.13>Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.14>The which he lacks; that to provoke in him,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.15>Are many simples operative, whose power</a><br>
<a name=4.4.16>Will close the eye of anguish.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.4.17>All blest secrets,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.18>All you unpublish’d virtues of the earth,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.19>Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate</a><br>
<a name=4.4.20>In the good man’s distress! Seek, seek for him;</a><br>
<a name=4.4.21>Lest his ungovern’d rage dissolve the life</a><br>
<a name=4.4.22>That wants the means to lead it.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter a Messenger</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>Messenger</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.4.23>News, madam;</a><br>
<a name=4.4.24>The British powers are marching hitherward.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.4.25>’Tis known before; our preparation stands</a><br>
<a name=4.4.26>In expectation of them. O dear father,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.27>It is thy business that I go about;</a><br>
<a name=4.4.28>Therefore great France</a><br>
<a name=4.4.29>My mourning and important tears hath pitied.</a><br>
<a name=4.4.30>No blown ambition doth our arms incite,</a><br>
<a name=4.4.31>But love, dear love, and our aged father’s right:</a><br>
<a name=4.4.32>Soon may I hear and see him!</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE V. Gloucester’s castle.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter REGAN and OSWALD</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.1>But are my brother’s powers set forth?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.2>Ay, madam.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.3>Himself in person there?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.4>Madam, with much ado:</a><br>
<a name=4.5.5>Your sister is the better soldier.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.6>Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.7>No, madam.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.8>What might import my sister’s letter to him?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.9>I know not, lady.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.10>‘Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.</a><br>
<a name=4.5.11>It was great ignorance, Gloucester’s eyes being out,</a><br>
<a name=4.5.12>To let him live: where he arrives he moves</a><br>
<a name=4.5.13>All hearts against us: Edmund, I think, is gone,</a><br>
<a name=4.5.14>In pity of his misery, to dispatch</a><br>
<a name=4.5.15>His nighted life: moreover, to descry</a><br>
<a name=4.5.16>The strength o’ the enemy.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.17>I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.18>Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us;</a><br>
<a name=4.5.19>The ways are dangerous.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.20>I may not, madam:</a><br>
<a name=4.5.21>My lady charged my duty in this business.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.22>Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you</a><br>
<a name=4.5.23>Transport her purposes by word? Belike,</a><br>
<a name=4.5.24>Something⁠—I know not what: I’ll love thee much,</a><br>
<a name=4.5.25>Let me unseal the letter.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.26>Madam, I had rather⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.27>I know your lady does not love her husband;</a><br>
<a name=4.5.28>I am sure of that: and at her late being here</a><br>
<a name=4.5.29>She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks</a><br>
<a name=4.5.30>To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.31>I, madam?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.32>I speak in understanding; you are; I know’t:</a><br>
<a name=4.5.33>Therefore I do advise you, take this note:</a><br>
<a name=4.5.34>My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talk’d;</a><br>
<a name=4.5.35>And more convenient is he for my hand</a><br>
<a name=4.5.36>Than for your lady’s: you may gather more.</a><br>
<a name=4.5.37>If you do find him, pray you, give him this;</a><br>
<a name=4.5.38>And when your mistress hears thus much from you,</a><br>
<a name=4.5.39>I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.</a><br>
<a name=4.5.40>So, fare you well.</a><br>
<a name=4.5.41>If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,</a><br>
<a name=4.5.42>Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.43>Would I could meet him, madam! I should show</a><br>
<a name=4.5.44>What party I do follow.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.5.45>Fare thee well.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE VI. Fields near Dover.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter GLOUCESTER, and EDGAR dressed like a peasant</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.1>When shall we come to the top of that same hill?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.2>You do climb up it now: look, how we labour.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.3>Methinks the ground is even.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.4>Horrible steep.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.5>Hark, do you hear the sea?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.6>No, truly.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.7>Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect</a><br>
<a name=4.6.8>By your eyes’ anguish.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.9>So may it be, indeed:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.10>Methinks thy voice is alter’d; and thou speak’st</a><br>
<a name=4.6.11>In better phrase and matter than thou didst.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.12>You’re much deceived: in nothing am I changed</a><br>
<a name=4.6.13>But in my garments.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.14>Methinks you’re better spoken.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.15>Come on, sir; here’s the place: stand still. How fearful</a><br>
<a name=4.6.16>And dizzy ’tis, to cast one’s eyes so low!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.17>The crows and choughs that wing the midway air</a><br>
<a name=4.6.18>Show scarce so gross as beetles: half way down</a><br>
<a name=4.6.19>Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.20>Methinks he seems no bigger than his head:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.21>The fishermen, that walk upon the beach,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.22>Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.23>Diminish’d to her cock; her cock, a buoy</a><br>
<a name=4.6.24>Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.25>That on the unnumber’d idle pebbles chafes,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.26>Cannot be heard so high. I’ll look no more;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.27>Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight</a><br>
<a name=4.6.28>Topple down headlong.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.29>Set me where you stand.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.30>Give me your hand: you are now within a foot</a><br>
<a name=4.6.31>Of the extreme verge: for all beneath the moon</a><br>
<a name=4.6.32>Would I not leap upright.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.33>Let go my hand.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.34>Here, friend, ‘s another purse; in it a jewel</a><br>
<a name=4.6.35>Well worth a poor man’s taking: fairies and gods</a><br>
<a name=4.6.36>Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.37>Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.38>Now fare you well, good sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.39>With all my heart.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.40>Why I do trifle thus with his despair</a><br>
<a name=4.6.41>Is done to cure it.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.42>[Kneeling] O you mighty gods!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.43>This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.44>Shake patiently my great affliction off:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.45>If I could bear it longer, and not fall</a><br>
<a name=4.6.46>To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.47>My snuff and loathed part of nature should</a><br>
<a name=4.6.48>Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.49>Now, fellow, fare thee well.</a><br>
<p><i>He falls forward</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.50>Gone, sir: farewell.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.51>And yet I know not how conceit may rob</a><br>
<a name=4.6.52>The treasury of life, when life itself</a><br>
<a name=4.6.53>Yields to the theft: had he been where he thought,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.54>By this, had thought been past. Alive or dead?</a><br>
<a name=4.6.55>Ho, you sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.56>Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.57>What are you, sir?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.58> Away, and let me die.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.59>Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.60>So many fathom down precipitating,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.61>Thou’dst shiver’d like an egg: but thou dost breathe;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.62>Hast heavy substance; bleed’st not; speak’st; art sound.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.63>Ten masts at each make not the altitude</a><br>
<a name=4.6.64>Which thou hast perpendicularly fell:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.65>Thy life’s a miracle. Speak yet again.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.66>But have I fall’n, or no?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.67>From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.68>Look up a-height; the shrill-gorged lark so far</a><br>
<a name=4.6.69>Cannot be seen or heard: do but look up.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.70>Alack, I have no eyes.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.71>Is wretchedness deprived that benefit,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.72>To end itself by death? ’Twas yet some comfort,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.73>When misery could beguile the tyrant’s rage,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.74>And frustrate his proud will.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.75>Give me your arm:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.76>Up: so. How is ‘t? Feel you your legs? You stand.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.77>Too well, too well.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.78>This is above all strangeness.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.79>Upon the crown o’ the cliff, what thing was that</a><br>
<a name=4.6.80>Which parted from you?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.81>A poor unfortunate beggar.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.82>As I stood here below, methought his eyes</a><br>
<a name=4.6.83>Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.84>Horns whelk’d and waved like the enridged sea:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.85>It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.86>Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours</a><br>
<a name=4.6.87>Of men’s impossibilities, have preserved thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.88>I do remember now: henceforth I’ll bear</a><br>
<a name=4.6.89>Affliction till it do cry out itself</a><br>
<a name=4.6.90>‘Enough, enough,’ and die. That thing you speak of,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.91>I took it for a man; often ’twould say</a><br>
<a name=4.6.92>‘The fiend, the fiend:’ he led me to that place.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.93>Bear free and patient thoughts. But who comes here?</a><br>
<p><i>Enter KING LEAR, fantastically dressed with wild flowers</i></p>
<a name=4.6.94>The safer sense will ne’er accommodate</a><br>
<a name=4.6.95>His master thus.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech31><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.96>No, they cannot touch me for coining; I am the</a><br>
<a name=4.6.97>king himself.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech32><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.98>O thou side-piercing sight!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech33><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.99>Nature’s above art in that respect. There’s your</a><br>
<a name=4.6.100>press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a</a><br>
<a name=4.6.101>crow-keeper: draw me a clothier’s yard. Look,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.102>look, a mouse! Peace, peace; this piece of toasted</a><br>
<a name=4.6.103>cheese will do ‘t. There’s my gauntlet; I’ll prove</a><br>
<a name=4.6.104>it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well</a><br>
<a name=4.6.105>flown, bird! i’ the clout, i’ the clout: hewgh!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.106>Give the word.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech34><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.107>Sweet marjoram.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech35><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.108>Pass.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech36><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.109>I know that voice.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech37><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.110>Ha! Goneril, with a white beard! They flattered</a><br>
<a name=4.6.111>me like a dog; and told me I had white hairs in my</a><br>
<a name=4.6.112>beard ere the black ones were there. To say ‘ay’</a><br>
<a name=4.6.113>and ‘no’ to every thing that I said!⁠—‘Ay’ and ‘no’</a><br>
<a name=4.6.114>too was no good divinity. When the rain came to</a><br>
<a name=4.6.115>wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when</a><br>
<a name=4.6.116>the thunder would not peace at my bidding; there I</a><br>
<a name=4.6.117>found ’em, there I smelt ’em out. Go to, they are</a><br>
<a name=4.6.118>not men o’ their words: they told me I was every</a><br>
<a name=4.6.119>thing; ’tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech38><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.120>The trick of that voice I do well remember:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.121>Is ‘t not the king?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech39><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.122>Ay, every inch a king:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.123>When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.124>I pardon that man’s life. What was thy cause? Adultery?</a><br>
<a name=4.6.125>Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.126>The wren goes to ‘t, and the small gilded fly</a><br>
<a name=4.6.127>Does lecher in my sight.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.128>Let copulation thrive; for Gloucester’s bastard son</a><br>
<a name=4.6.129>Was kinder to his father than my daughters</a><br>
<a name=4.6.130>Got ’tween the lawful sheets.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.131>To ‘t, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.132>Behold yond simpering dame,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.133>Whose face between her forks presages snow;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.134>That minces virtue, and does shake the head</a><br>
<a name=4.6.135>To hear of pleasure’s name;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.136>The fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to ‘t</a><br>
<a name=4.6.137>With a more riotous appetite.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.138>Down from the waist they are Centaurs,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.139>Though women all above:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.140>But to the girdle do the gods inherit,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.141>Beneath is all the fiends’;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.142>There’s hell, there’s darkness, there’s the</a><br>
<a name=4.6.143>sulphurous pit,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.144>Burning, scalding, stench, consumption; fie,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.145>fie, fie! pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.146>good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.147>there’s money for thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech40><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.148>O, let me kiss that hand!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech41><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.149>Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech42><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.150>O ruin’d piece of nature! This great world</a><br>
<a name=4.6.151>Shall so wear out to nought. Dost thou know me?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech43><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.152>I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny</a><br>
<a name=4.6.153>at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid! I’ll not</a><br>
<a name=4.6.154>love. Read thou this challenge; mark but the</a><br>
<a name=4.6.155>penning of it.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech44><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.156>Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech45><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.157>I would not take this from report; it is,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.158>And my heart breaks at it.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech46><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.159>Read.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech47><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.160>What, with the case of eyes?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech48><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.161>O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your</a><br>
<a name=4.6.162>head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in</a><br>
<a name=4.6.163>a heavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how</a><br>
<a name=4.6.164>this world goes.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech49><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.165>I see it feelingly.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech50><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.166>What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes</a><br>
<a name=4.6.167>with no eyes. Look with thine ears: see how yond</a><br>
<a name=4.6.168>justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark, in</a><br>
<a name=4.6.169>thine ear: change places; and, handy-dandy, which</a><br>
<a name=4.6.170>is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen</a><br>
<a name=4.6.171>a farmer’s dog bark at a beggar?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech51><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.172>Ay, sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech52><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.173>And the creature run from the cur? There thou</a><br>
<a name=4.6.174>mightst behold the great image of authority: a</a><br>
<a name=4.6.175>dog’s obeyed in office.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.176>Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.177>Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.178>Thou hotly lust’st to use her in that kind</a><br>
<a name=4.6.179>For which thou whipp’st her. The usurer hangs the cozener.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.180>Through tatter’d clothes small vices do appear;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.181>Robes and furr’d gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.182>And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.183>Arm it in rags, a pigmy’s straw does pierce it.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.184>None does offend, none, I say, none; I’ll able ’em:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.185>Take that of me, my friend, who have the power</a><br>
<a name=4.6.186>To seal the accuser’s lips. Get thee glass eyes;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.187>And like a scurvy politician, seem</a><br>
<a name=4.6.188>To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.189>Pull off my boots: harder, harder: so.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech53><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.190>O, matter and impertinency mix’d! Reason in madness!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech54><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.191>If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.192>I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.193>Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.194>Thou know’st, the first time that we smell the air,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.195>We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech55><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.196>Alack, alack the day!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech56><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.197>When we are born, we cry that we are come</a><br>
<a name=4.6.198>To this great stage of fools: this a good block;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.199>It were a delicate stratagem, to shoe</a><br>
<a name=4.6.200>A troop of horse with felt: I’ll put ‘t in proof;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.201>And when I have stol’n upon these sons-in-law,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.202>Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!</a><br>
<p><i>Enter a Gentleman, with Attendants</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech57><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.203>O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.204>Your most dear daughter⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech58><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.205>No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even</a><br>
<a name=4.6.206>The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.207>You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.208>I am cut to the brains.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech59><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.209>You shall have any thing.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech60><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.210>No seconds? all myself?</a><br>
<a name=4.6.211>Why, this would make a man a man of salt,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.212>To use his eyes for garden water-pots,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.213>Ay, and laying autumn’s dust.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech61><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.214>Good sir⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech62><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.215>I will die bravely, like a bridegroom. What!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.216>I will be jovial: come, come; I am a king,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.217>My masters, know you that.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech63><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.218>You are a royal one, and we obey you.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech64><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.219>Then there’s life in’t. Nay, if you get it, you</a><br>
<a name=4.6.220>shall get it with running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit running; Attendants follow</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech65><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.221>A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.222>Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.223>Who redeems nature from the general curse</a><br>
<a name=4.6.224>Which twain have brought her to.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech66><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.225>Hail, gentle sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech67><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.226> Sir, speed you: what’s your will?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech68><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.227>Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech69><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.228>Most sure and vulgar: every one hears that,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.229>Which can distinguish sound.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech70><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.230>But, by your favour,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.231>How near’s the other army?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech71><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.232>Near and on speedy foot; the main descry</a><br>
<a name=4.6.233>Stands on the hourly thought.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech72><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.234>I thank you, sir: that’s all.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech73><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.235>Though that the queen on special cause is here,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.236>Her army is moved on.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech74><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.237>I thank you, sir.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit Gentleman</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech75><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.238>You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.239>Let not my worser spirit tempt me again</a><br>
<a name=4.6.240>To die before you please!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech76><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.241>Well pray you, father.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech77><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.242>Now, good sir, what are you?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech78><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.243>A most poor man, made tame to fortune’s blows;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.244>Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.245>Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.246>I’ll lead you to some biding.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech79><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.247>Hearty thanks:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.248>The bounty and the benison of heaven</a><br>
<a name=4.6.249>To boot, and boot!</a><br>
<p><i>Enter OSWALD</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech80><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.250>A proclaim’d prize! Most happy!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.251>That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh</a><br>
<a name=4.6.252>To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.253>Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out</a><br>
<a name=4.6.254>That must destroy thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech81><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.255>Now let thy friendly hand</a><br>
<a name=4.6.256>Put strength enough to’t.</a><br>
<p><i>EDGAR interposes</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech82><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.257>Wherefore, bold peasant,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.258>Darest thou support a publish’d traitor? Hence;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.259>Lest that the infection of his fortune take</a><br>
<a name=4.6.260>Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech83><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.261>Ch’ill not let go, zir, without vurther ‘casion.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech84><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.262>Let go, slave, or thou diest!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech85><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.263>Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk</a><br>
<a name=4.6.264>pass. An chud ha’ bin zwaggered out of my life,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.265>’twould not ha’ bin zo long as ’tis by a vortnight.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.266>Nay, come not near th’ old man; keep out, che vor</a><br>
<a name=4.6.267>ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be</a><br>
<a name=4.6.268>the harder: ch’ill be plain with you.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech86><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.269>Out, dunghill!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech87><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.270>Ch’ill pick your teeth, zir: come; no matter vor</a><br>
<a name=4.6.271>your foins.</a><br>
<p><i>They fight, and EDGAR knocks him down</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech88><b>OSWALD</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.272>Slave, thou hast slain me: villain, take my purse:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.273>If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.274>And give the letters which thou find’st about me</a><br>
<a name=4.6.275>To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out</a><br>
<a name=4.6.276>Upon the British party: O, untimely death!</a><br>
<p><i>Dies</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech89><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.277>I know thee well: a serviceable villain;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.278>As duteous to the vices of thy mistress</a><br>
<a name=4.6.279>As badness would desire.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech90><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.280>What, is he dead?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech91><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.281>Sit you down, father; rest you</a><br>
<a name=4.6.282>Let’s see these pockets: the letters that he speaks of</a><br>
<a name=4.6.283>May be my friends. He’s dead; I am only sorry</a><br>
<a name=4.6.284>He had no other death’s-man. Let us see:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.285>Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.286>To know our enemies’ minds, we’ld rip their hearts;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.287>Their papers, is more lawful.</a><br>
<p><i>Reads</i></p>
<a name=4.6.288>‘Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have</a><br>
<a name=4.6.289>many opportunities to cut him off: if your will</a><br>
<a name=4.6.290>want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.291>There is nothing done, if he return the conqueror:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.292>then am I the prisoner, and his bed my goal; from</a><br>
<a name=4.6.293>the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply</a><br>
<a name=4.6.294>the place for your labour.</a><br>
<a name=4.6.295>‘Your⁠—wife, so I would say⁠—</a><br>
<a name=4.6.296>‘Affectionate servant,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.297>‘GONERIL.’</a><br>
<a name=4.6.298>O undistinguish’d space of woman’s will!</a><br>
<a name=4.6.299>A plot upon her virtuous husband’s life;</a><br>
<a name=4.6.300>And the exchange my brother! Here, in the sands,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.301>Thee I’ll rake up, the post unsanctified</a><br>
<a name=4.6.302>Of murderous lechers: and in the mature time</a><br>
<a name=4.6.303>With this ungracious paper strike the sight</a><br>
<a name=4.6.304>Of the death practised duke: for him ’tis well</a><br>
<a name=4.6.305>That of thy death and business I can tell.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech92><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.306>The king is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.307>That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling</a><br>
<a name=4.6.308>Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.309>So should my thoughts be sever’d from my griefs,</a><br>
<a name=4.6.310>And woes by wrong imaginations lose</a><br>
<a name=4.6.311>The knowledge of themselves.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech93><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.6.312>Give me your hand:</a><br>
<p><i>Drum afar off</i></p>
<a name=4.6.313>Far off, methinks, I hear the beaten drum:</a><br>
<a name=4.6.314>Come, father, I’ll bestow you with a friend.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE VII. A tent in the French camp. LEAR on a bed asleep,</h3>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.1>soft music playing; Gentleman, and others attending.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter CORDELIA, KENT, and Doctor</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.2>O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.3>To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.4>And every measure fail me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.5>To be acknowledged, madam, is o’erpaid.</a><br>
<a name=4.7.6>All my reports go with the modest truth;</a><br>
<a name=4.7.7>Nor more nor clipp’d, but so.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.8>Be better suited:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.9>These weeds are memories of those worser hours:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.10>I prithee, put them off.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.11>Pardon me, dear madam;</a><br>
<a name=4.7.12>Yet to be known shortens my made intent:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.13>My boon I make it, that you know me not</a><br>
<a name=4.7.14>Till time and I think meet.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.15>Then be’t so, my good lord.</a><br>
<p><i>To the Doctor</i></p>
<a name=4.7.16>How does the king?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.17>Madam, sleeps still.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.18>O you kind gods,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.19>Cure this great breach in his abused nature!</a><br>
<a name=4.7.20>The untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up</a><br>
<a name=4.7.21>Of this child-changed father!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.22>So please your majesty</a><br>
<a name=4.7.23>That we may wake the king: he hath slept long.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.24>Be govern’d by your knowledge, and proceed</a><br>
<a name=4.7.25>I’ the sway of your own will. Is he array’d?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.26>Ay, madam; in the heaviness of his sleep</a><br>
<a name=4.7.27>We put fresh garments on him.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.28>Be by, good madam, when we do awake him;</a><br>
<a name=4.7.29>I doubt not of his temperance.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.30>Very well.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.31>Please you, draw near. Louder the music there!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.32>O my dear father! Restoration hang</a><br>
<a name=4.7.33>Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss</a><br>
<a name=4.7.34>Repair those violent harms that my two sisters</a><br>
<a name=4.7.35>Have in thy reverence made!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.36>Kind and dear princess!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.37>Had you not been their father, these white flakes</a><br>
<a name=4.7.38>Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face</a><br>
<a name=4.7.39>To be opposed against the warring winds?</a><br>
<a name=4.7.40>To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?</a><br>
<a name=4.7.41>In the most terrible and nimble stroke</a><br>
<a name=4.7.42>Of quick, cross lightning? to watch⁠—poor perdu!⁠—</a><br>
<a name=4.7.43>With this thin helm? Mine enemy’s dog,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.44>Though he had bit me, should have stood that night</a><br>
<a name=4.7.45>Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.46>To hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.47>In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!</a><br>
<a name=4.7.48>’Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once</a><br>
<a name=4.7.49>Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.50>Madam, do you; ’tis fittest.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.51>How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.52>You do me wrong to take me out o’ the grave:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.53>Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound</a><br>
<a name=4.7.54>Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears</a><br>
<a name=4.7.55>Do scald like moulten lead.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.56>Sir, do you know me?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.57>You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.58>Still, still, far wide!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.59>He’s scarce awake: let him alone awhile.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.60>Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?</a><br>
<a name=4.7.61>I am mightily abused. I should e’en die with pity,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.62>To see another thus. I know not what to say.</a><br>
<a name=4.7.63>I will not swear these are my hands: let’s see;</a><br>
<a name=4.7.64>I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured</a><br>
<a name=4.7.65>Of my condition!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.66> O, look upon me, sir,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.67>And hold your hands in benediction o’er me:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.68>No, sir, you must not kneel.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.69>Pray, do not mock me:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.70>I am a very foolish fond old man,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.71>Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;</a><br>
<a name=4.7.72>And, to deal plainly,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.73>I fear I am not in my perfect mind.</a><br>
<a name=4.7.74>Methinks I should know you, and know this man;</a><br>
<a name=4.7.75>Yet I am doubtful for I am mainly ignorant</a><br>
<a name=4.7.76>What place this is; and all the skill I have</a><br>
<a name=4.7.77>Remembers not these garments; nor I know not</a><br>
<a name=4.7.78>Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;</a><br>
<a name=4.7.79>For, as I am a man, I think this lady</a><br>
<a name=4.7.80>To be my child Cordelia.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.81>And so I am, I am.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.82>Be your tears wet? yes, ‘faith. I pray, weep not:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.83>If you have poison for me, I will drink it.</a><br>
<a name=4.7.84>I know you do not love me; for your sisters</a><br>
<a name=4.7.85>Have, as I do remember, done me wrong:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.86>You have some cause, they have not.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.87>No cause, no cause.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.88>Am I in France?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech31><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.89> In your own kingdom, sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech32><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.90>Do not abuse me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech33><b>Doctor</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.91>Be comforted, good madam: the great rage,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.92>You see, is kill’d in him: and yet it is danger</a><br>
<a name=4.7.93>To make him even o’er the time he has lost.</a><br>
<a name=4.7.94>Desire him to go in; trouble him no more</a><br>
<a name=4.7.95>Till further settling.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech34><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.96>Will’t please your highness walk?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech35><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.97>You must bear with me:</a><br>
<a name=4.7.98>Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt all but KENT and Gentleman</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech36><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.99>Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech37><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.100>Most certain, sir.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech38><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.101>Who is conductor of his people?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech39><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.102>As ’tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech40><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.103>They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl</a><br>
<a name=4.7.104>of Kent in Germany.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech41><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.105>Report is changeable. ’Tis time to look about; the</a><br>
<a name=4.7.106>powers of the kingdom approach apace.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech42><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.107>The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare you</a><br>
<a name=4.7.108>well, sir.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech43><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=4.7.109>My point and period will be throughly wrought,</a><br>
<a name=4.7.110>Or well or ill, as this day’s battle’s fought.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote><p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
