<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
<h3>SCENE I. The British camp, near Dover.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter, with drum and colours, EDMUND, REGAN, Gentlemen, and Soldiers.</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.1>Know of the duke if his last purpose hold,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.2>Or whether since he is advised by aught</a><br>
<a name=5.1.3>To change the course: he’s full of alteration</a><br>
<a name=5.1.4>And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure.</a><br>
<p><i>To a Gentleman, who goes out</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.5>Our sister’s man is certainly miscarried.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.6>’Tis to be doubted, madam.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.7>Now, sweet lord,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.8>You know the goodness I intend upon you:</a><br>
<a name=5.1.9>Tell me⁠—but truly⁠—but then speak the truth,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.10>Do you not love my sister?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.11>In honour’d love.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.12>But have you never found my brother’s way</a><br>
<a name=5.1.13>To the forfended place?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.14>That thought abuses you.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.15>I am doubtful that you have been conjunct</a><br>
<a name=5.1.16>And bosom’d with her, as far as we call hers.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.17>No, by mine honour, madam.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.18>I never shall endure her: dear my lord,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.19>Be not familiar with her.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.20>Fear me not:</a><br>
<a name=5.1.21>She and the duke her husband!</a><br>
<p><i>Enter, with drum and colours, ALBANY, GONERIL, and Soldiers</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.22>[Aside] I had rather lose the battle than that sister</a><br>
<a name=5.1.23>Should loosen him and me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.24>Our very loving sister, well be-met.</a><br>
<a name=5.1.25>Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.26>With others whom the rigor of our state</a><br>
<a name=5.1.27>Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.28>I never yet was valiant: for this business,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.29>It toucheth us, as France invades our land,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.30>Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.31>Most just and heavy causes make oppose.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.32>Sir, you speak nobly.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.33>Why is this reason’d?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.34>Combine together ’gainst the enemy;</a><br>
<a name=5.1.35>For these domestic and particular broils</a><br>
<a name=5.1.36>Are not the question here.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.37>Let’s then determine</a><br>
<a name=5.1.38>With the ancient of war on our proceedings.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.39>I shall attend you presently at your tent.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.40>Sister, you’ll go with us?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.41>No.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.42>’Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.43>[Aside] O, ho, I know the riddle.⁠—I will go.</a><br>
<p><i>As they are going out, enter EDGAR disguised</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.44>If e’er your grace had speech with man so poor,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.45>Hear me one word.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.46> I’ll overtake you. Speak.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt all but ALBANY and EDGAR</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.47>Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.</a><br>
<a name=5.1.48>If you have victory, let the trumpet sound</a><br>
<a name=5.1.49>For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.50>I can produce a champion that will prove</a><br>
<a name=5.1.51>What is avouched there. If you miscarry,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.52>Your business of the world hath so an end,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.53>And machination ceases. Fortune love you.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.54>Stay till I have read the letter.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.55>I was forbid it.</a><br>
<a name=5.1.56>When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.57>And I’ll appear again.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.58>Why, fare thee well: I will o’erlook thy paper.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit EDGAR</i></p>
<p><i>Re-enter EDMUND</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.59>The enemy’s in view; draw up your powers.</a><br>
<a name=5.1.60>Here is the guess of their true strength and forces</a><br>
<a name=5.1.61>By diligent discovery; but your haste</a><br>
<a name=5.1.62>Is now urged on you.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.63>We will greet the time.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech31><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.1.64>To both these sisters have I sworn my love;</a><br>
<a name=5.1.65>Each jealous of the other, as the stung</a><br>
<a name=5.1.66>Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?</a><br>
<a name=5.1.67>Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoy’d,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.68>If both remain alive: to take the widow</a><br>
<a name=5.1.69>Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;</a><br>
<a name=5.1.70>And hardly shall I carry out my side,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.71>Her husband being alive. Now then we’ll use</a><br>
<a name=5.1.72>His countenance for the battle; which being done,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.73>Let her who would be rid of him devise</a><br>
<a name=5.1.74>His speedy taking off. As for the mercy</a><br>
<a name=5.1.75>Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.76>The battle done, and they within our power,</a><br>
<a name=5.1.77>Shall never see his pardon; for my state</a><br>
<a name=5.1.78>Stands on me to defend, not to debate.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE II. A field between the two camps.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Alarum within. Enter, with drum and colours, KING LEAR, CORDELIA, and Soldiers, over the stage; and exeunt</i>
</blockquote>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter EDGAR and GLOUCESTER</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.2.1>Here, father, take the shadow of this tree</a><br>
<a name=5.2.2>For your good host; pray that the right may thrive:</a><br>
<a name=5.2.3>If ever I return to you again,</a><br>
<a name=5.2.4>I’ll bring you comfort.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.2.5>Grace go with you, sir!</a><br>
<p><i>Exit EDGAR</i></p>
<p><i>Alarum and retreat within. Re-enter EDGAR</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.2.6>Away, old man; give me thy hand; away!</a><br>
<a name=5.2.7>King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta’en:</a><br>
<a name=5.2.8>Give me thy hand; come on.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.2.9>No farther, sir; a man may rot even here.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.2.10>What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure</a><br>
<a name=5.2.11>Their going hence, even as their coming hither;</a><br>
<a name=5.2.12>Ripeness is all: come on.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>GLOUCESTER</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.2.13>And that’s true too.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt</i></p>
</blockquote>
<h3>SCENE III. The British camp near Dover.</h3>
<p><blockquote>
<i>Enter, in conquest, with drum and colours, EDMUND, KING LEAR and CORDELIA, prisoners; Captain, Soldiers, &amp; c</i>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech1><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.1>Some officers take them away: good guard,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.2>Until their greater pleasures first be known</a><br>
<a name=5.3.3>That are to censure them.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech2><b>CORDELIA</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.4>We are not the first</a><br>
<a name=5.3.5>Who, with best meaning, have incurr’d the worst.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.6>For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.7>Myself could else out-frown false fortune’s frown.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.8>Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech3><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.9>No, no, no, no! Come, let’s away to prison:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.10>We two alone will sing like birds i’ the cage:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.11>When thou dost ask me blessing, I’ll kneel down,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.12>And ask of thee forgiveness: so we’ll live,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.13>And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh</a><br>
<a name=5.3.14>At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues</a><br>
<a name=5.3.15>Talk of court news; and we’ll talk with them too,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.16>Who loses and who wins; who’s in, who’s out;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.17>And take upon’s the mystery of things,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.18>As if we were God’s spies: and we’ll wear out,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.19>In a wall’d prison, packs and sects of great ones,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.20>That ebb and flow by the moon.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech4><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.21>Take them away.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech5><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.22>Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.23>The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?</a><br>
<a name=5.3.24>He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.25>And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.26>The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.27>Ere they shall make us weep: we’ll see ’em starve</a><br>
<a name=5.3.28>first. Come.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt KING LEAR and CORDELIA, guarded</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech6><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.29>Come hither, captain; hark.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.30>Take thou this note;</a><br>
<p><i>Giving a paper</i></p>
<a name=5.3.31>go follow them to prison:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.32>One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost</a><br>
<a name=5.3.33>As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way</a><br>
<a name=5.3.34>To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men</a><br>
<a name=5.3.35>Are as the time is: to be tender-minded</a><br>
<a name=5.3.36>Does not become a sword: thy great employment</a><br>
<a name=5.3.37>Will not bear question; either say thou’lt do ‘t,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.38>Or thrive by other means.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech7><b>Captain</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.39>I’ll do ‘t, my lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech8><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.40>About it; and write happy when thou hast done.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.41>Mark, I say, instantly; and carry it so</a><br>
<a name=5.3.42>As I have set it down.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech9><b>Captain</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.43>I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.44>If it be man’s work, I’ll do ‘t.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
<p><i>Flourish. Enter ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, another Captain, and Soldiers</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech10><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.45>Sir, you have shown to-day your valiant strain,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.46>And fortune led you well: you have the captives</a><br>
<a name=5.3.47>That were the opposites of this day’s strife:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.48>We do require them of you, so to use them</a><br>
<a name=5.3.49>As we shall find their merits and our safety</a><br>
<a name=5.3.50>May equally determine.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech11><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.51>Sir, I thought it fit</a><br>
<a name=5.3.52>To send the old and miserable king</a><br>
<a name=5.3.53>To some retention and appointed guard;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.54>Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.55>To pluck the common bosom on his side,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.56>An turn our impress’d lances in our eyes</a><br>
<a name=5.3.57>Which do command them. With him I sent the queen;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.58>My reason all the same; and they are ready</a><br>
<a name=5.3.59>To-morrow, or at further space, to appear</a><br>
<a name=5.3.60>Where you shall hold your session. At this time</a><br>
<a name=5.3.61>We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.62>And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed</a><br>
<a name=5.3.63>By those that feel their sharpness:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.64>The question of Cordelia and her father</a><br>
<a name=5.3.65>Requires a fitter place.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech12><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.66>Sir, by your patience,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.67>I hold you but a subject of this war,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.68>Not as a brother.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech13><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.69> That’s as we list to grace him.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.70>Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.71>Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.72>Bore the commission of my place and person;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.73>The which immediacy may well stand up,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.74>And call itself your brother.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech14><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.75>Not so hot:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.76>In his own grace he doth exalt himself,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.77>More than in your addition.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech15><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.78>In my rights,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.79>By me invested, he compeers the best.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech16><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.80>That were the most, if he should husband you.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech17><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.81>Jesters do oft prove prophets.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech18><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.82>Holla, holla!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.83>That eye that told you so look’d but a-squint.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech19><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.84>Lady, I am not well; else I should answer</a><br>
<a name=5.3.85>From a full-flowing stomach. General,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.86>Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.87>Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.88>Witness the world, that I create thee here</a><br>
<a name=5.3.89>My lord and master.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech20><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.90>Mean you to enjoy him?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech21><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.91>The let-alone lies not in your good will.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech22><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.92>Nor in thine, lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech23><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.93>Half-blooded fellow, yes.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech24><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.94>[To EDMUND] Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech25><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.95>Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee</a><br>
<a name=5.3.96>On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.97>This gilded serpent</a><br>
<p><i>Pointing to Goneril</i></p>
<a name=5.3.98>For your claim, fair sister,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.99>I bar it in the interest of my wife:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.100>’Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.101>And I, her husband, contradict your bans.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.102>If you will marry, make your loves to me,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.103>My lady is bespoke.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech26><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.104>An interlude!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech27><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.105>Thou art arm’d, Gloucester: let the trumpet sound:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.106>If none appear to prove upon thy head</a><br>
<a name=5.3.107>Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.108>There is my pledge;</a><br>
<p><i>Throwing down a glove</i></p>
<a name=5.3.109>I’ll prove it on thy heart,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.110>Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less</a><br>
<a name=5.3.111>Than I have here proclaim’d thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech28><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.112>Sick, O, sick!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech29><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.113>[Aside] If not, I’ll ne’er trust medicine.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech30><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.114>There’s my exchange:</a><br>
<p><i>Throwing down a glove</i></p>
<a name=5.3.115>what in the world he is</a><br>
<a name=5.3.116>That names me traitor, villain-like he lies:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.117>Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.118>On him, on you, who not? I will maintain</a><br>
<a name=5.3.119>My truth and honour firmly.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech31><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.120>A herald, ho!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech32><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.121> A herald, ho, a herald!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech33><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.122>Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.123>All levied in my name, have in my name</a><br>
<a name=5.3.124>Took their discharge.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech34><b>REGAN</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.125>My sickness grows upon me.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech35><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.126>She is not well; convey her to my tent.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit Regan, led</i></p>
<p><i>Enter a Herald</i></p>
<a name=5.3.127>Come hither, herald⁠—Let the trumpet sound,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.128>And read out this.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech36><b>Captain</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.129>Sound, trumpet!</a><br>
<p><i>A trumpet sounds</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech37><b>Herald</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.130>[Reads] ‘If any man of quality or degree within</a><br>
<a name=5.3.131>the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.132>supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold</a><br>
<a name=5.3.133>traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the</a><br>
<a name=5.3.134>trumpet: he is bold in his defence.’</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech38><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.135>Sound!</a><br>
<p><i>First trumpet</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech39><b>Herald</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.136>Again!</a><br>
<p><i>Second trumpet</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech40><b>Herald</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.137>Again!</a><br>
<p><i>Third trumpet</i></p>
<p><i>Trumpet answers within</i></p>
<p><i>Enter EDGAR, at the third sound, armed, with a trumpet before him</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech41><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.138>Ask him his purposes, why he appears</a><br>
<a name=5.3.139>Upon this call o’ the trumpet.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech42><b>Herald</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.140>What are you?</a><br>
<a name=5.3.141>Your name, your quality? and why you answer</a><br>
<a name=5.3.142>This present summons?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech43><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.143>Know, my name is lost;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.144>By treason’s tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.145>Yet am I noble as the adversary</a><br>
<a name=5.3.146>I come to cope.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech44><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.147> Which is that adversary?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech45><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.148>What’s he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech46><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.149>Himself: what say’st thou to him?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech47><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.150>Draw thy sword,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.151>That, if my speech offend a noble heart,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.152>Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.153>Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.154>My oath, and my profession: I protest,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.155>Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.156>Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.157>Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.158>False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.159>Conspirant ’gainst this high-illustrious prince;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.160>And, from the extremest upward of thy head</a><br>
<a name=5.3.161>To the descent and dust below thy foot,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.162>A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou ‘No,’</a><br>
<a name=5.3.163>This sword, this arm, and my best spirits, are bent</a><br>
<a name=5.3.164>To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.165>Thou liest.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech48><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.166>In wisdom I should ask thy name;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.167>But, since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.168>And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.169>What safe and nicely I might well delay</a><br>
<a name=5.3.170>By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.171>Back do I toss these treasons to thy head;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.172>With the hell-hated lie o’erwhelm thy heart;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.173>Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.174>This sword of mine shall give them instant way,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.175>Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!</a><br>
<p><i>Alarums. They fight. EDMUND falls</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech49><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.176>Save him, save him!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech50><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.177>This is practise, Gloucester:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.178>By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer</a><br>
<a name=5.3.179>An unknown opposite; thou art not vanquish’d,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.180>But cozen’d and beguiled.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech51><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.181>Shut your mouth, dame,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.182>Or with this paper shall I stop it: Hold, sir:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.183>Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.184>No tearing, lady: I perceive you know it.</a><br>
<p><i>Gives the letter to EDMUND</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech52><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.185>Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.186>Who can arraign me for’t.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech53><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.187>Most monstrous! oh!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.188>Know’st thou this paper?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech54><b>GONERIL</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.189>Ask me not what I know.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech55><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.190>Go after her: she’s desperate; govern her.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech56><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.191>What you have charged me with, that have I done;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.192>And more, much more; the time will bring it out:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.193>’Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou</a><br>
<a name=5.3.194>That hast this fortune on me? If thou’rt noble,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.195>I do forgive thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech57><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.196> Let’s exchange charity.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.197>I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.198>If more, the more thou hast wrong’d me.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.199>My name is Edgar, and thy father’s son.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.200>The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices</a><br>
<a name=5.3.201>Make instruments to plague us:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.202>The dark and vicious place where thee he got</a><br>
<a name=5.3.203>Cost him his eyes.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech58><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.204> Thou hast spoken right, ’tis true;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.205>The wheel is come full circle: I am here.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech59><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.206>Methought thy very gait did prophesy</a><br>
<a name=5.3.207>A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.208>Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I</a><br>
<a name=5.3.209>Did hate thee or thy father!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech60><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.210>Worthy prince, I know’t.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech61><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.211>Where have you hid yourself?</a><br>
<a name=5.3.212>How have you known the miseries of your father?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech62><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.213>By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.214>And when ’tis told, O, that my heart would burst!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.215>The bloody proclamation to escape,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.216>That follow’d me so near⁠—O, our lives’ sweetness!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.217>That we the pain of death would hourly die</a><br>
<a name=5.3.218>Rather than die at once!⁠—taught me to shift</a><br>
<a name=5.3.219>Into a madman’s rags; to assume a semblance</a><br>
<a name=5.3.220>That very dogs disdain’d: and in this habit</a><br>
<a name=5.3.221>Met I my father with his bleeding rings,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.222>Their precious stones new lost: became his guide,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.223>Led him, begg’d for him, saved him from despair;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.224>Never⁠—O fault!⁠—reveal’d myself unto him,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.225>Until some half-hour past, when I was arm’d:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.226>Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.227>I ask’d his blessing, and from first to last</a><br>
<a name=5.3.228>Told him my pilgrimage: but his flaw’d heart,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.229>Alack, too weak the conflict to support!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.230>’Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.231>Burst smilingly.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech63><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.232>This speech of yours hath moved me,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.233>And shall perchance do good: but speak you on;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.234>You look as you had something more to say.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech64><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.235>If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.236>For I am almost ready to dissolve,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.237>Hearing of this.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech65><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.238> This would have seem’d a period</a><br>
<a name=5.3.239>To such as love not sorrow; but another,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.240>To amplify too much, would make much more,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.241>And top extremity.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.242>Whilst I was big in clamour came there in a man,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.243>Who, having seen me in my worst estate,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.244>Shunn’d my abhorr’d society; but then, finding</a><br>
<a name=5.3.245>Who ’twas that so endured, with his strong arms</a><br>
<a name=5.3.246>He fastened on my neck, and bellow’d out</a><br>
<a name=5.3.247>As he’ld burst heaven; threw him on my father;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.248>Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him</a><br>
<a name=5.3.249>That ever ear received: which in recounting</a><br>
<a name=5.3.250>His grief grew puissant and the strings of life</a><br>
<a name=5.3.251>Began to crack: twice then the trumpets sounded,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.252>And there I left him tranced.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech66><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.253>But who was this?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech67><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.254>Kent, sir, the banish’d Kent; who in disguise</a><br>
<a name=5.3.255>Follow’d his enemy king, and did him service</a><br>
<a name=5.3.256>Improper for a slave.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter a Gentleman, with a bloody knife</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech68><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.257>Help, help, O, help!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech69><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.258>What kind of help?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech70><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.259>Speak, man.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech71><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.260>What means that bloody knife?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech72><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.261>’Tis hot, it smokes;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.262>It came even from the heart of⁠—O, she’s dead!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech73><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.263>Who dead? speak, man.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech74><b>Gentleman</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.264>Your lady, sir, your lady: and her sister</a><br>
<a name=5.3.265>By her is poisoned; she hath confess’d it.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech75><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.266>I was contracted to them both: all three</a><br>
<a name=5.3.267>Now marry in an instant.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech76><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.268>Here comes Kent.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech77><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.269>Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.270>This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.271>Touches us not with pity.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit Gentleman</i></p>
<p><i>Enter KENT</i></p>
<a name=5.3.272>O, is this he?</a><br>
<a name=5.3.273>The time will not allow the compliment</a><br>
<a name=5.3.274>Which very manners urges.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech78><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.275>I am come</a><br>
<a name=5.3.276>To bid my king and master aye good night:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.277>Is he not here?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech79><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.278> Great thing of us forgot!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.279>Speak, Edmund, where’s the king? and where’s Cordelia?</a><br>
<a name=5.3.280>See’st thou this object, Kent?</a><br>
<p><i>The bodies of GONERIL and REGAN are brought in</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech80><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.281>Alack, why thus?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech81><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.282> Yet Edmund was beloved:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.283>The one the other poison’d for my sake,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.284>And after slew herself.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech82><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.285>Even so. Cover their faces.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech83><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.286>I pant for life: some good I mean to do,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.287>Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.288>Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ</a><br>
<a name=5.3.289>Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.290>Nay, send in time.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech84><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.291> Run, run, O, run!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech85><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.292>To who, my lord? Who hath the office? send</a><br>
<a name=5.3.293>Thy token of reprieve.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech86><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.294>Well thought on: take my sword,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.295>Give it the captain.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech87><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.296>Haste thee, for thy life.</a><br>
<p><i>Exit EDGAR</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech88><b>EDMUND</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.297>He hath commission from thy wife and me</a><br>
<a name=5.3.298>To hang Cordelia in the prison, and</a><br>
<a name=5.3.299>To lay the blame upon her own despair,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.300>That she fordid herself.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech89><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.301>The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.</a><br>
<p><i>EDMUND is borne off</i></p>
<p><i>Re-enter KING LEAR, with CORDELIA dead in his arms; EDGAR, Captain, and others following</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech90><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.302>Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.303>Had I your tongues and eyes, I’ld use them so</a><br>
<a name=5.3.304>That heaven’s vault should crack. She’s gone for ever!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.305>I know when one is dead, and when one lives;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.306>She’s dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.307>If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.308>Why, then she lives.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech91><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.309>Is this the promised end</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech92><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.310>Or image of that horror?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech93><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.311>Fall, and cease!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech94><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.312>This feather stirs; she lives! if it be so,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.313>It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows</a><br>
<a name=5.3.314>That ever I have felt.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech95><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.315>[Kneeling] O my good master!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech96><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.316>Prithee, away.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech97><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.317>’Tis noble Kent, your friend.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech98><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.318>A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.319>I might have saved her; now she’s gone for ever!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.320>Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.321>What is’t thou say’st? Her voice was ever soft,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.322>Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.323>I kill’d the slave that was a-hanging thee.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech99><b>Captain</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.324>’Tis true, my lords, he did.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech100><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.325>Did I not, fellow?</a><br>
<a name=5.3.326>I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion</a><br>
<a name=5.3.327>I would have made them skip: I am old now,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.328>And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?</a><br>
<a name=5.3.329>Mine eyes are not o’ the best: I’ll tell you straight.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech101><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.330>If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.331>One of them we behold.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech102><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.332>This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech103><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.333>The same,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.334>Your servant Kent: Where is your servant Caius?</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech104><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.335>He’s a good fellow, I can tell you that;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.336>He’ll strike, and quickly too: he’s dead and rotten.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech105><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.337>No, my good lord; I am the very man⁠—</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech106><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.338>I’ll see that straight.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech107><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.339>That, from your first of difference and decay,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.340>Have follow’d your sad steps.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech108><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.341>You are welcome hither.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech109><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.342>Nor no man else: all’s cheerless, dark, and deadly.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.343>Your eldest daughters have fordone them selves,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.344>And desperately are dead.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech110><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.345>Ay, so I think.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech111><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.346>He knows not what he says: and vain it is</a><br>
<a name=5.3.347>That we present us to him.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech112><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.348>Very bootless.</a><br>
<p><i>Enter a Captain</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech113><b>Captain</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.349>Edmund is dead, my lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech114><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.350>That’s but a trifle here.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.351>You lords and noble friends, know our intent.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.352>What comfort to this great decay may come</a><br>
<a name=5.3.353>Shall be applied: for us we will resign,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.354>During the life of this old majesty,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.355>To him our absolute power:</a><br>
<p><i>To EDGAR and KENT</i></p>
<a name=5.3.356>you, to your rights:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.357>With boot, and such addition as your honours</a><br>
<a name=5.3.358>Have more than merited. All friends shall taste</a><br>
<a name=5.3.359>The wages of their virtue, and all foes</a><br>
<a name=5.3.360>The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech115><b>KING LEAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.361>And my poor fool is hang’d! No, no, no life!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.362>Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.363>And thou no breath at all? Thou’lt come no more,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.364>Never, never, never, never, never!</a><br>
<a name=5.3.365>Pray you, undo this button: thank you, sir.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.366>Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips,</a><br>
<a name=5.3.367>Look there, look there!</a><br>
<p><i>Dies</i></p>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech116><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.368>He faints! My lord, my lord!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech117><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.369>Break, heart; I prithee, break!</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech118><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.370>Look up, my lord.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech119><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.371>Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! he hates him much</a><br>
<a name=5.3.372>That would upon the rack of this tough world</a><br>
<a name=5.3.373>Stretch him out longer.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech120><b>EDGAR</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.374>He is gone, indeed.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech121><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.375>The wonder is, he hath endured so long:</a><br>
<a name=5.3.376>He but usurp’d his life.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech122><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.377>Bear them from hence. Our present business</a><br>
<a name=5.3.378>Is general woe.</a><br>
<p><i>To KENT and EDGAR</i></p>
<a name=5.3.379>Friends of my soul, you twain</a><br>
<a name=5.3.380>Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech123><b>KENT</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.381>I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.382>My master calls me, I must not say no.</a><br>
</blockquote>

<a name=speech124><b>ALBANY</b></a>
<blockquote>
<a name=5.3.383>The weight of this sad time we must obey;</a><br>
<a name=5.3.384>Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.</a><br>
<a name=5.3.385>The oldest hath borne most: we that are young</a><br>
<a name=5.3.386>Shall never see so much, nor live so long.</a><br>
<p><i>Exeunt, with a dead march</i></p>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
